--- Page 1 ---
PREPRINT
1
Power Flow Solvability with Volt-Var Controlled
Inverter-Based Resources
Taha Saeed Khan, Student Member, IEEE, Hamidreza Nazaripouya, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper establishes a sufficient condition for
guaranteeing power flow solvability in distribution grids with
inverter-based resources (IBRs) operating under IEEE 1547-
compliant Volt-Var control. While designed to improve voltage
profiles, reactive power injection can drive the system toward its
operational limits. Under these stressed conditions, any further
incremental reactive power injection can trigger voltage col-
lapse—the point at which a power flow solution ceases to exist. In
this paper, by leveraging a phasor-based voltage representation,
the power flow equations with Volt-Var control are developed in
the complex fixed point form, enabling a compact formulation
and the rigorous application of fixed-point theorems. Addressing
the challenges posed by the non-holomorphicity of the complex
power flow equations due to the Volt-Var function’s dependence
on voltage magnitude, the solvability conditions are then de-
veloped using the Brouwer fixed-point theorem. The proposed
conditions are validated through simulations on distribution test
feeders, with a primary focus on their application to real-time
decision-making for voltage regulation services.
Index Terms—Volt-Var control, Solvability Analysis, Distribu-
tion Grids, IBRs, Voltage Regulation, Fixed Point Method.
NOMENCLATURE
v = (v1, v2, . . . , vN)T
vk is the positive-sequence complex
voltage at bus k.
s = (s1, s2, . . . , sN)T
sk is the complex nodal power in-
jected into bus k.
m = (jm1, . . . , jmN)T
mk is the slope of the voltage mag-
nitude dependent reactive power ex-
changed at bus k.
Bus 0
Slack bus.
v0, s0
Slack bus positive-sequence complex
voltage and power.
Y
Positive-sequence nodal admittance
matrix.
YLL
Square submatrix of Y , excluding the
slack bus.
w = (w1, w2, . . . , wN)T
wk is the positive-sequence no-load
complex voltage at bus k.
u = W −1v, W = diag(w) Normalized
positive-sequence
volt-
ages.
¯
z
The complex conjugate of the com-
plex number z.
∥A∥∞≜maxk
P
l |Akl|
The ℓ∞norm of A.
⊙
Element-wise
(Hadamard)
product
operator; for matrices A and B of
equal dimension, (A⊙B)ij = aijbij.
I. INTRODUCTION
Taha Saeed Khan and Hamidreza Nazaripouya are with the School of Elec-
trical Computer Engineering, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater 74075,
OK, USA
P
OWER distribution grids are conventionally engineered
to supply reliable power to consumers. Exceeding the
capacity of a power distribution system by integrating ad-
ditional load or generation can lead to voltage collapse [1].
Guaranteeing the existence of a power flow solution [2] for a
given load and generation indicates that the distribution grid
is capable of serving loads without causing voltage collapse.
When a power flow solution ceases to exist, it indicates that
the system has reached its maximum transferable power limit.
This event is a saddle-node bifurcation, the point at which
the operating point ceases to exist, hence leading to voltage
collapse [3] [4] [5].
Distribution grids exhibit diverse characteristics, influenced
by geographical, demographic, and climatic factors. These
differences are reflected in the electrical load patterns of
consumers and the impedance properties of the distribution
system. Given the diverse operating conditions in a distribution
grid, it is crucial for power system operators to understand the
allowable operating ranges and security regions necessary to
ensure secure and feasible grid operation.
With the increasing complexity of load and generation
patterns, distribution grids face new challenges: the most
important is the need for effective voltage regulation [6],
a task complicated by uncertain load patterns, intermittent
renewable generation, and the widespread inclusion of fast
electric vehicle (EV) chargers.
One method proposed by IEEE 1547 [7] for regulating volt-
ages using IBRs includes injecting reactive power. A widely
adopted approach for this is the use of Volt-Var functionality,
where each inverter in the grid is programmed to inject or
absorb reactive power as a function of its nodal voltage
magnitude. These functions are configured by setting slope
intercept points in inverter settings [8]. Programming inverters
with Volt-Var curves leads to voltage-dependent reactive power
generation at various nodes throughout the grid. However,
this Volt-Var-based reactive power injection can cause several
issues, including control instability, voltage oscillations, and
lack of adaptability to changing grid conditions, as highlighted
in [6].
With increasing levels of active power exchanged with the
grid, reactive power support can serve two purposes: It allows
the grid to feed more load, commonly depicted by an extended
nose curve [9]. Secondly, it helps to bring the voltage profile
of the grid within an acceptable range. However, similar to the
limits on active power loading in distribution systems, there is
also an upper bound on the amount of reactive power that can
be injected. The upper limits for the exchange of active power
P and reactive power Q in a simple two-bus system, shown in
arXiv:2604.17205v1  [eess.SY]  19 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
PREPRINT
2
Fig. 1, are given by (1), where E is the ideal voltage source
representing the infinite bus. R and X represent the series
resistance and reactance, respectively [9].
Fig. 1. A single load supplied by an infinite bus via a power line.
Pmax(Q = 0) = E2
2X2

−R +
p
R2 + X2

Qmax(P = 0) = E2
2R2

−X +
p
R2 + X2

(1)
Exceeding these limits can trigger voltage collapse. Hence,
when making operational decisions, each scenario must be
validated to ensure the existence of a feasible power flow
solution.
With the rapid deployment of inverter-based resources
across the distribution grid, Volt-Var functionality can be
effectively used to maintain the voltage profile across the
grid, particularly when high-demand loads are connected,
such as EV chargers. However, with Volt-Var curve-based
reactive power support, the total reactive power injection
across the system cannot be predetermined, as the reactive
power supplied at each node is adjusted based on its local
voltage conditions. Therefore, careful tuning of these curves
is essential to prevent excessive reactive power injection,
especially during high grid loading. Failure to do so may push
the system toward voltage collapse.
Optimizing the Volt-Var control curve requires running
power flow analyses across multiple scenarios to ensure re-
liable and effective grid operation. Guaranteeing the existence
of a valid power flow solution around the operating point can
eliminate the need to repeatedly solve complex power flow
equations. This approach significantly improves computational
efficiency, enabling faster decision-making in real-time appli-
cations. These challenges motivate the need for analytical tools
that can certify the existence of a power flow solution under
voltage-dependent control actions, without relying on repeated
numerical power flow computations.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II reviews existing relevant approaches and discusses the
analytical advantages of conducting analysis in the complex
domain, which serves as a foundation to introduce the non-
holomorphic characteristics of voltage dependent power ex-
changes and their impact on analyzing solvability with Volt-
Var control. The paper proceeds in Section III with the
formulation of the power flow problem considering Volt-Var
control. Section IV provides the solvability certificate for
systems with voltage-dependent power exchanges based on
current or past data of operating conditions. In Section V,
the proposed solvability certificate is tested on IEEE test case
scenarios, with the conclusion presented in Section VI.
II. SOLVABILITY CHALLENGES IN POWER FLOW
The solvability of power flow in distribution grids has long
been a central focus of research, with particular emphasis on
assessing how close a given operating point is to the system’s
maximum loading capacity. Traditional approaches address
this question by explicitly solving the power flow equations
and placing significant effort on improving the computational
speed of these solvers.
Among these methods, continuation power flow (CPF) [17],
[18] remains the standard technique for accurately tracing the
maximum loading point. However, CPF is computationally
intensive due to its predictor–corrector structure, which re-
quires repeatedly solving the nonlinear power flow equations
at each incremental loading step. As a result, the existence of a
solution is verified directly through numerical convergence at
every iteration, leading to a substantial computational burden
that can limit its applicability in real-time or large-scale
scenarios.
Motivated by this challenge, improving the computational
efficiency of power flow analysis in inverter-dominated net-
works has attracted significant research attention. A Jacobian-
based phasor-domain power flow solver that explicitly in-
corporates inverter-based resource models using a Modified
Augmented Nodal Analysis (MANA) formulation has been
proposed in [19], demonstrating reductions in computation
time while maintaining accurate short-circuit current calcu-
lations. A general fast power flow algorithm that extends the
classical DC formulation to both transmission and distribu-
tion networks with high line resistance is proposed in [20].
Nevertheless, these approaches still fundamentally rely on
explicitly solving the power flow equations. This motivates
alternative frameworks that assess feasibility and solvability
directly, without the need to iteratively solve the power flow
problem.
A. Shift of Focus from Real to Complex Domain
Solvability analysis emerges as a vital tool in facilitating
real-time decision making in active distribution grids [5].
Early foundational studies [23], [24] formulated the power
flow problem predominantly in the real domain to develop
solvability conditions. The pioneering work on solvability
certificates by [25], followed by the quantitative framework
introduced in [26], highlighted the quadratic nature of the
power flow equations and delineated feasible regions for
steady-state operation.
While these approaches provide valuable insights, they in-
herently treat voltage magnitude and angle separately, making
it difficult to construct fixed-point mappings that preserve the
analytical structure of the AC power flow equations [27], [28].
This difficulty arises primarily from the nonlinear trigonomet-
ric representation of voltage magnitudes and phase angles in
power flow equations, which complicates the satisfaction of
essential conditions required by fixed point theorems, such
as compactness, self-mapping, and contraction, thus hindering
the direct application of analytical fixed point criteria for
establishing solvability [29].


--- Page 3 ---
PREPRINT
3
Existing methods based on Banach’s theorem [14], [16] and
Brouwer’s theorem [11] have established sufficient solvability
conditions for constant-power injections. However, these ap-
proaches do not extend to scenarios where power injections
are voltage-magnitude-dependent, such as those governed by
Volt-Var control functions. The Newton-Raphson method [30]
has been used to solve the power flow problem for a variety
of voltage-magnitude-dependent models, but no solvability
certificate has yet been provided for such loads.
B. Challenges with Complex Formation
The initial challenge in formulating the power flow problem
as a complex fixed-point equation lies in the fact that the
mapping is generally nonholomorphic. A holomorphic func-
tion is a complex function that is complex differentiable in a
neighborhood of each point in its domain, implying that it is
smooth and infinitely differentiable. Unlike real functions that
can be differentiable at a point but not smooth everywhere,
a complex function that is differentiable in a complex coor-
dinate space is smooth (C∞) throughout its domain and has
derivatives of all orders. The smoothness and ability to express
a function as a convergent power series stem from satisfying
the Cauchy-Riemann equations. This condition is stricter than
real differentiability, as complex numbers inherently represent
two real-valued variables, interpreted as the real and imagi-
nary components. Hence, they are particularly well-suited for
modeling complex power, voltage, and impedance in power
systems.
To address the non-holomorphic nature of the power
flow problem, the holomorphic embedding load flow method
(HELM) [31] was employed. This technique was particularly
developed to overcome the shortcomings of conventional
iterative numerical methods (e.g., Newton-Raphson, Gauss-
Seidel), as their convergence cannot be guaranteed for a power
system under critical loading, even when a solution exists. In
particular, the holomorphic embedding method [31] relies on
the derivation of power series [32] in a complex form, prompt-
ing the question of whether voltage-magnitude-dependent load
and generation models, such as those governed by Volt-Var
control, can be represented as power series, considering that
the derivation of power series requires the underlying function
to be differentiable.
The problem of differentiability in the power flow problem
was also observed in [12], and a Schwarz lemma-based
solution for the multivariable problem under constant power
injections was proposed. The latest work in [4] applied the
Kantorovich fixed point theorem to guarantee the existence and
uniqueness of the power flow solutions; however, the approach
also relies on the differentiability of the underlying function.
The power flow equation, when formulated with constant
loads, is non-holomorphic as it involves the complex conjugate
of the voltage variable v. Wirtinger Calculus [5] can be em-
ployed to deal with differentiability when conjugate variables
are the only source of non-holomorphicity. An approximate
power series around the operating point can also be used
to address this issue [14]. Another technique, known as the
holomorphic embedding method, was also proposed to handle
the complex conjugate part [31]. However, a key challenge in
networks with inverters operating in Volt-Var control mode
is that the power flow equations are functions of voltage
magnitudes rather than complex voltage variables, introducing
a unique non-holomorphic property.
This poses a challenge for solvability analysis, particu-
larly when applying the fixed-point theorem that requires
the contraction property to hold. For example, the Banach
fixed point theorem requires demonstrating that the system’s
mapping is a contraction. Although differentiability is not
a requirement, the standard methods for proving contraction
and deriving practical solvability certificates rely on bounding
the function’s derivative. This presents a major hurdle, as
the voltage-magnitude dependencies render the power flow
equations non-differentiable (non-holomorphic), making these
conventional techniques inapplicable.
Remark 1: The function f(z) = |z|, where z is a complex
variable, is continuous everywhere, but is not differentiable
anywhere. Therefore, an approximate power series representa-
tion of the power flow equations involving this function in the
form of complex variables cannot be developed, except at the
zero voltage vector. Thus, it can be concluded that for voltage-
dependent power sources, proving contraction is a challenging
task as the corresponding functions are not differentiable.
C. Contribution
In this work, Brouwer’s fixed-point theorem is leveraged to
develop a solvability certificate for power flow equations that
incorporate voltage-dependent reactive power injections. Ex-
isting research on the solvability of power flow predominantly
concentrates on ZIP (constant-power, constant-current, and
constant-impedance) loads [10]–[14] [16]. This paper derives
a generalized solvability certificate that simultaneously accom-
modates both Volt-Var characteristics and constant power load
models. This enables the prescreening of operating conditions
for which voltage regulation functions are guaranteed to
converge, even in highly stressed or weakly supported grid
conditions. Hence, the primary contributions of this work are
as follows.
• It embeds voltage-magnitude-dependent power injections,
characterized by Volt-Var control, into a tractable fixed-
point framework.
• It establishes checkable conditions using the Brouwer
fixed point theorem that guarantee the existence of a
power flow solution under voltage-magnitude-dependent
power injections characterized by Volt-Var control.
III. MATHEMATICAL MODELING
A. Volt-Var Function
In this section, the Volt-Var function and its manifestation in
the fixed-point-based power flow equation are provided. Volt-
Var curves are characterized by a slope, saturation points, and
an optional dead band, shown in Fig. 2(a) [8]. When an inverter
is operating in Volt-Var mode, its reactive power response can
be approximated as a linear function of the voltage magnitude


--- Page 4 ---
PREPRINT
4
in the vicinity of the operating point. Hence, an inverter
operating in the Volt-Var mode can be effectively modeled
using the slope-intercept form, as shown in Fig. 2(b).
Fig. 2. Voltage-magnitude-dependent reactive power generation and absorp-
tion curves. The deadband is optional in the inverter setting and can be
removed by setting Vb = Vc.
The linear Volt-Var based power injection around the ref-
erence point at bus k can hence be formulated in a complex
form as (2):
sinv,k = j(−mk|vk| + q0,k) ≜QVolt-Var
(2)
where j is the symbol used to denote the imaginary unit,
sinv,k represents the reactive power injected by an inverter at
bus k. mk and q0,k represent the slope and q axis intercept,
respectively, resulting from programming the inverter at kth
bus with Volt-Var functions. |vk| is voltage magnitude at kth
bus.
In addition to power injection by inverters, consider a
constant load/generation sP Q
k
connected at the kth bus with
pk and qk being the net constant active and reactive power
components, respectively, as shown in (3):
sP Q
k
= pk + jqk
(3)
Hence, the net power injection sk at bus k is expressed as
(4) and (5):
sk = sinv,k + sP Q
k
(4)
sk = pk + j(−mk|vk| + q0,k + qk)
(5)
Separating the voltage dependent and independent compo-
nents in the complex power results in (6):
sk = −(jmk)|vk| + (pk + jq0,k + jqk)
= −(jmk)|vk| + sk,const
(6)
where the voltage independent component is defined as:
sk,const ≜pk + jq0,k + jqk
(7)
B. Power Flow Equation
Consider a distribution network modeled using its positive-
sequence equivalent, comprising N PQ buses and a single
slack bus with a complex voltage fixed at 1 p.u. Under constant
power loading/generation sP Q ≜(sP Q
1
, sP Q
2
, . . . , sP Q
N )T , the
fixed-point formulation of the power flow equations can be
expressed as (8) [14]:
v = w + Y −1
LL diag(¯
v)−1sP Q ≜G(v)
(8)
Here, YLL is the reduced admittance sub-matrix obtained
by removing the slack bus from the full admittance matrix Y .
Following the implicit Zbus formulation presented in [13]. The
admittance matrix Y can be partitioned as:
Y =
Y00
Y0L
YL0
YLL

,
(9)
where Y00 is a scalar, Y0L is a 1 × N row vector, YL0 is an
N × 1 column vector, and YLL is an N × N matrix.
The vector w, defined as the zero-load voltage of the grid,
is given by (10):
w ≜−Y −1
LL YL0
(10)
By defining sconst = (s1,const, . . . , sN,const)T , the power flow
equation incorporating Volt-Var functionality and constant
power injections, as defined in (6), can be rewritten as (11):
v = w + Y −1
LL diag(¯
v)−1(−diag(m)|v| + sconst) ≜F(v) (11)
To solve the power flow equation in (11), it can be reformu-
lated into the iterative structure presented in (12):
v(l+1) = w+Y −1
LL diag(¯
v(l))−1(−diag(m)|v(l)| + sconst) (12)
C. Normalized Form
To facilitate further analysis, the power flow equation (11)
is normalized. Let W ≜diag(w) and u ≜W −1v, where u is
the normalized voltage vector. Substituting v = Wu into (11)
yields:
Wu = w + Y −1
LL W
−1diag(u)−1(−diag(m)|Wu| + sconst)
(13)
Defining, W ∗≜W −1Y −1
LL W
−1
u = W −1w + W ∗diag(u)−1(−diag(m)|W||u| + sconst)
(14)
Defining,
M ≜m ⊙|w|
M ≜diag(m ⊙|w|)
The equation (14) can be written as (15):
u = 1 + W ∗diag(u)−1(−M|u| + sconst) ≜˜
F(u)
(15)
where 1
=
(1, 1, . . . , 1)T is the unity vector. Now the
following iteration of ˜
F(u) can be written as:
u(l+1) = 1 + W ∗diag(u(l))−1(−M|u(l)| + sconst)
(16)


--- Page 5 ---
PREPRINT
5
IV. POWER FLOW SOLVABILITY WITH VOLT-VAR
FUNCTION
This section provides the solvability conditions and their
proof based on the Brouwer fixed point theorem [33].
Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theorem has an advantage, especially
for analyzing complex power flow equations, as it only de-
mands the continuity of the function, without necessitating
differentiability. Although the theorem does not guide on how
to locate the solution point(s), it ensures the existence of at
least one fixed point. The theorem offers a promising way
to verify the problem solvability, it does not provide any
information on the potential convergence or divergence of the
iterative methods that may be used to find a solution.
Theorem 1 (Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theorem): In a finite-
dimensional, compact, convex subset of a Euclidean space, any
continuous function in Cn that maps the set to itself has at
least one fixed point.
Thus, the following three conditions need to be satisfied
for the application of Brouwer’s Fixed Point theorem on the
iterative form (16):
1) Euclidean space: Since the problem under consideration
(i.e., the power flow equation) is a finite-dimensional
problem, the space under consideration is a Euclidean
space.
2) Continuity: Although the power flow equation with the
Volt-Var function is not differentiable, it is continuous.
3) Self-mapping on compact and convex set: This is the
only condition that needs to be proved. Thus, the goal
is to find a compact convex set within which the iteration
(16) maps the set to itself.
A. Solvability Certificate
Theorem 2: Let ˆ
v be a solution to the power flow prob-
lem (11) for complex power injection ˆ
s ≜−diag( ˆ
m)|ˆ
v| +
ˆ
sconst. Consider another power injection candidate given by
s ≜−diag(m)|v| + sconst. To evaluate the solvability of
the candidate power injection s, we introduce the operator
ξ(ˆ
s) ≜

W ∗diag(ˆ
s)


∞, ξ(M) ≜

W ∗diag(M)


∞, and
ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|) ≜


W ∗diag(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|)



∞, to
capture the maximum weighted influence of known power
injections, Volt-Var slopes, and the residual power injection
mismatch on the normalized voltage update ˜
F(u), respectively.
Furthermore, let umin ≜minj


 ˆ
vj
wj


 be the minimum normal-
ized voltage magnitude associated with the known feasible
operating point ˆ
v. If the candidate power injection satisfies
the following sufficient conditions:

umin −ξ(ˆ
s)
umin
−ξ(M)

> 0
(17)
∆≜

umin −ξ(ˆ
s)
umin
−ξ(M)
2
−4ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|) > 0
(18)
Then there exists a solution v ∈D to the power flow prob-
lem (11), where D ≜{v : |vj −ˆ
vj| ≤ρ|wj|, j = 1, . . . , N}
with ρ ≜

umin−
ξ(ˆ
s)
umin −ξ(M)

−
√
∆
2
The following lemma is a direct consequence of the above
theorem:
Lemma: Suppose that the pair (ˆ
v, ˆ
s) and power injection
candidate given by s ≜−diag(m)|v|+sconst satisfies (17) and
(18). Then ˜
F is a self-mapping of u ≜W −1v on ˜
D, where
˜
D ≜{u : |uj −ˆ
uj| ≤ρ, j = 1, . . . , N}
(19)
and ˆ
uj = ˆ
vj
wj .
Proof: Now the focus is on proving self-mapping of equation (16)
on the compact convex set ˜
D. Since (ˆ
v, ˆ
s) satisfies the equation (11),
from (15) we have:
ˆ
u = 1 + W ∗diag(ˆ
u)−1(ˆ
s)
(20)
For any new power injection vector s = −M|u| + sconst, the
power flow equation is given by (15). Hence, the difference between
(15) and (20) can be written as:
˜
F(u) −ˆ
u =
W ∗

diag(¯
u)−1 
−M|u| + sconst

−diag(¯
ˆ
u)−1  ˆ
s
 
The objective is to demonstrate that there exists a radius r such
that if |ui −ˆ
ui| ≤r then | ˜
F(u)i −ˆ
ui| ≤r for all i.
| ˜
F(u)i −ˆ
ui| =





X
j
(W ∗)ij
 
(−M|u| + sconst)j
¯
uj
−ˆ
sj
¯
ˆ
uj
!




=





X
j
W ∗
ij
 
(−M|u|)j ˆ
uj + (sconst)j ˆ
uj −ˆ
sjuj
uj ˆ
uj
!




Adding and subtracting:
ˆ
sj ˆ
uj
uj ˆ
uj :
=





X
j
W ∗
ij
 
(−M|u|)j ˆ
uj + ˆ
uj(sj,const −ˆ
sj)
uj ˆ
uj
+
ˆ
sj(ˆ
uj −uj)
uj ˆ
uj
!




Adding and subtracting
(M|ˆ
u|)j
uj
:
=





X
j
W ∗
ij
 
−(M|u|)j + (sj,const −ˆ
sj)
uj
+
(M|ˆ
u|)j −(M|ˆ
u|)j
uj
+ ˆ
sj(ˆ
uj −uj)
uj ˆ
uj
!




=





X
j
W ∗
ij
 
Mjj(|ˆ
uj| −|uj|) + (sj,const −ˆ
sj −Mjj|ˆ
uj|)
uj
+
ˆ
sj(ˆ
uj −uj)
uj ˆ
uj
!




Applying the triangle inequality upper-bounds the absolute value
of the entire sum by the sum of the absolute values of its individual
components:
≤
(X
j




W ∗
ij
 
Mjj(|ˆ
uj| −|uj|) + (sj,const −ˆ
sj −Mjj|ˆ
uj|)
uj
+
ˆ
sj(ˆ
uj −uj)
uj ˆ
uj
!




)
(21)


--- Page 6 ---
PREPRINT
6
≤
(X
j




W ∗
ij
 
Mjj(|ˆ
uj| −|uj|)
uj
+ ˆ
sj(ˆ
uj −uj)
uj ˆ
uj
!



 +
X
j




W ∗
ij
 
(sj,const −ˆ
sj −Mjj|ˆ
uj|)
uj
!




)
(22)
≤
(X
j



W ∗
ij
Mjj(|ˆ
uj| −|uj|)
uj



 +
X
j




W ∗
ij
 
ˆ
sj(ˆ
uj −uj)
uj ˆ
uj
!



 +
X
j




W ∗
ij
 
(sj,const −ˆ
sj −Mjj|ˆ
uj|)
uj
!




)
(23)
Now choosing r to be strictly less than umin i.e. r < umin, and
assuming all ui are initialized within the radius r of ˆ
ui i.e. they
satisfy |ui −ˆ
ui| ≤r, then:
1) By definition of umin, |ˆ
uj| ≥umin
2) |uj| ≥umin −r or |uj| ≥umin −r
3) By reverse triangular identity: r ≥|uj −ˆ
uj| ≥||uj| −|ˆ
uj||
By considering each term in (23) separately and using ξ(ˆ
s),
ξ(M), ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|) and umin to upper bound them,
one can obtain:
X
j



W ∗
ij
Mjj(|ˆ
uj| −|uj|)
uj




≤
X
j

W ∗
ijMjj


r
(umin −r) ≤
ξ(M)r
(umin −r)
(24)
similarly,
X
j






W ∗
ij
ˆ
sj(ˆ
uj −uj)
¯
uj ¯
ˆ
uj






≤
X
j






W ∗
ijˆ
sj






r
(umin −r)
≤ξ(ˆ
s)
r
(umin −r)umin
(25)
and,
X
j




W ∗
ij
 
(sj,const −ˆ
sj −Mjj|ˆ
uj|)
uj
!




≤
X
j


W ∗
ij((sj,const −ˆ
sj −Mjj|ˆ
uj|))



1
(umin −r)
≤ξ((sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|))
1
(umin −r)
(26)
By combining (24), (25), and (26), the expression (22) can
be written as (27):
| ˜
F(u)i −ˆ
ui| ≤

ξ(M)r
(umin −r)+
ξ((sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|))
1
(umin −r) + ξ(ˆ
s)
r
(umin −r)umin

(27)
To fulfill the criteria of Self Mapping, the following condi-
tion must be met:
ξ(M)r
(umin −r) + ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|)
(umin −r)
+
ξ(ˆ
s)r
(umin −r)umin
≤r
(28)
ξ(M)r + ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|) + ξ(ˆ
s)r
umin
−r(umin −r) ≤0
(29)
r2 −r

umin −ξ(ˆ
s)
umin
−ξ(M)

+ ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|) ≤0
(30)
Equation (30) is a quadratic equation in r. Since ξ(sconst−ˆ
s−
M|ˆ
u|) is positive,

umin −
ξ(ˆ
s)
umin −ξ(M)

has to be positive
for a positive r to exist. Further, with the positive discriminant
∆=

umin −
ξ(ˆ
s)
umin −ξ(M)
2
−4ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|),
existence of a positive r is guaranteed. Hence, the following
two conditions guarantee the existence of a solution:
1)

umin −
ξ(ˆ
s)
umin −ξ(M)

> 0
2)

umin −
ξ(ˆ
s)
umin −ξ(M)
2
−4ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|) > 0
Since a voltage solution in the near vicinity of the
current operational point (ˆ
v, ˆ
s) is of interest, the smaller
solution
is
considered,
which
is
provided
by:
ρ
=

umin−
ξ(ˆ
s)
umin −ξ(M)

−
√
∆
2
Remark 2: Theorem 2 provides a sufficient condition for
the existence of at least one fixed point of the function defined
in the domain D, although it does not guarantee uniqueness.
Furthermore, Brouwer’s theorem does not inherently guarantee
that an iterative method will converge to any fixed point(s)
within the domain D.
Remark 3: The solvability certificate guarantees the ex-
istence of a solution to the nonlinear power-flow equations
within a feasible domain D. Once the existence of a solu-
tion in D is guaranteed, system-level operational and control
decisions can be made with assurance that a power flow
solution exists in the admissible voltage region. If an explicit
solution is required, then any standard power-flow solution
method, including Newton-Raphson, HELM, or MANA, may
be used to compute the exact solution within D. Importantly,
the proposed solvability certificate verifies only the existence
of a solution in D and not the convergence or performance of
any particular algorithm.
B. Conservativeness and Solvability gaps
Solvability gaps, defined as the distance between theoret-
ical solvability bounds and practical insolvability points, are
observed in numerical studies [37] [27], which illustrates the
conservative nature of the bounds used to ensure rigorous and
broadly applicable solvability guarantees.
In this work, the resulting conservativeness is primarily at-
tributed to the dependence on the minimum normalized voltage
bound umin and the induced norm quantities ξ(ˆ
s), ξ(M), and


--- Page 7 ---
PREPRINT
7
ξ((sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|)).
First, the dependence on the normalized minimum voltage
bound umin shapes the tightness of the solvability condition.
It may impose additional restrictions on operating scenarios
with heterogeneous voltage profiles due to localized low
voltage conditions. Consequently, a gap may arise between
the theoretical solvability bound and the actual solvability
boundary observed in practice.
Second, the quantities ξ(·) represent norm bounds that char-
acterize worst-case weights stem from the network admittance
structure (i.e., W*). Terms ξ(ˆ
s), ξ(M), and ξ(sconst−ˆ
s−M|ˆ
u|)
naturally depend on: (i) the selected operating point ˆ
s, (ii)
the different magnitude of the Volt-Var slopes (i.e., m at each
node) across the network, and (iii) the residual power-injection
mismatch between the chosen operating point and the up-
dated power injections, which comprise both incremental load
changes and Volt–Var support, respectively. Variations in these
factors can lead to noticeable changes in the corresponding
ξ values, thereby influencing the tightness of the resulting
solvability bound.
C. Computational Complexity and Scalability
Conventional power flow solvers rely on iterative methods
to solve the nonlinear power flow equations. When Volt-Var
control is incorporated, the resulting voltage-dependent reac-
tive power introduces additional complexity. In distribution
systems with high inverter-based resource (IBR) penetration,
this voltage-dependence can render the power flow equations
ill-conditioned [35], often leading to slow convergence or
even divergence of standard iterative solvers. In contrast,
the proposed solvability certificate circumvents the need for
iterative power flow solutions by verifying the existence of an
equilibrium through a single, non-iterative evaluation.
1) Computational Burden: For radial networks, the nodal
admittance matrix is highly sparse. By exploiting this
sparsity and symmetry (e.g., using LU decomposition
with complete Markowitz pivoting [36]), the complexity
of one power flow iteration is reduced to O(N).
In verifying the proposed solvabity conditions (17) and
(18), computational complexity mainly stems from cal-
culating ξ(ˆ
s), ξ(M) and ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|). For the
radial system, again, this complexity is inherently O(N)
by exploiting sparsity and restricting the evaluation to
leaf nodes only. Hence, the complexity of checking
solvability conditions is equivalent to only one power
flow iteration.
2) Scalability and Robustness: As the number of nodes
N increases, the computational time for evaluating the
certificate scales linearly for radial systems (i.e., O(N))
as it primarily involves vector matrix products and norm
calculations. Moreover, since the solvability condition
relies on explicit, norm-based bounds rather than an
iterative process, it avoids the slow convergence and di-
vergence issues that typically burden power flow solvers.
D. Application
The proposed conditions (17) and (18) have multiple appli-
cations. They can aid in determining how a distribution grid
can be loaded incrementally with the Volt-Var function for
voltage support. In such a scenario, these conditions assist in
making real-time operational decisions on load increments and
Volt–Var control setpoints. Once the existence of a solution in
D is guaranteed, system-level operational and control deci-
sions can be made with confidence that a feasible equilibrium
exists away from voltage-collapse regions, provided that D
lies within the feasible domain.
Due to load variations, multiple incremental loading scenar-
ios are expected, Algorithm 1 checks the proposed solvability
conditions across all anticipated scenarios and returns a flag of
1 if solvability is guaranteed for all scenario, and 0 otherwise.
In a real-time Energy Management System (EMS) setting,
a flag of 0 serves as an early-warning indicator, enabling
operators to adjust Volt–Var control parameters—such as
slope, deadband, or reactive power limits—in advance to
restore solvability and prevent operation near voltage-collapse
boundaries.
In the numerical illustrations presented in Section V, a
single incremental loading scenario is evaluated for each of
the IEEE 37-bus and IEEE 123-bus test systems to demon-
strate the screening process. These results highlight the real-
time applicability of the proposed solvability conditions for
active decision-making without repeatedly solving power-flow
equations.
Further applications include determining how to effectively
adjust the slopes of the Volt-Var function when the grid loading
scenario varies over time. In addition, to improve computa-
tional efficiency in solving the optimal power flow problem
involving Volt-Var controlled IBRs, the proposed conditions
can be incorporated as constraints within a linearized power
system model [38].
V. NUMERICAL ILLUSTRATION
This section begins with a scenario featuring a low-voltage
distribution grid under high loading conditions with Volt-Var
support activated. The objective is to demonstrate that during
high loading conditions, excessive reactive power generation,
when used to manage the voltage profile, can lead to voltage
breakdown in the grid. The conditions proposed in (17) and
(18) are evaluated to assess power flow solvability.
In addition, the proposed conditions are evaluated on the
IEEE benchmarks. The results are presented for the IEEE
34 Bus and IEEE-123 Bus feeders [40], where all power
lines are adjusted to be of the same type but of different
lengths, and the model parameters are based on typical values
for medium voltage cables according to [41]. The numerical
results guarantee the existence of a solution when new loads
are anticipated to be added, and voltage-dependent reactive
power support via Volt-Var control is available. This shows the
effectiveness of the proposed conditions for real-time decision-
making, enabling efficient management of incremental grid
loading under Volt-Var support provided by IBRs, without
repeatedly solving power flow equations.


--- Page 8 ---
PREPRINT
8
Algorithm 1 Real-Time Solvability Screening for Different
Loading Scenarios under Volt-Var Control
Require: Known feasible operating point (ˆ
v, ˆ
s), network
matrix (W ∗), an expected loading scenario set K =
{s1, s2, . . . , sK} with total K scenarios, where each sce-
nario consist of incremental load and Volt-Var set point
(M, sconst).
Ensure: Solvability test for each scenario sk ∈K, corre-
sponding admissible radii {ρ(k)}, and a solvability flag
flag.
1: Precompute scenario-invariant norm terms below only
once
ξ(ˆ
s),
ξ(M),
umin
2: Initialize k ←1,
flag ←1.
3: for each scenario sk ∈K do
4:
Compute the scenario-dependent term
ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|)
5:
Evaluate solvability conditions (17) and (18) for scenario k.
6:
if conditions (17) and (18) are satisfied then
7:
Compute admissible radius ρ(k) using (19).
8:
Mark scenario k as solvable.
9:
Update k ←k + 1.
10:
else
11:
Request full power flow solution.
12:
if power flow iterations converge then
13:
Mark scenario k as solvable.
14:
Update k ←k + 1.
15:
else
16:
Set solvability flag flag ←0.
17:
Return flag.
18:
end if
19:
end if
20: end for
21: Return flag.
A. 5-Bus Low Voltage feeder
In this section, a case scenario demonstrating voltage break-
down and power flow insolvability is presented. Simulink [42]
is used to simulate voltage collapse triggered by injection of
reactive power based on Volt-Var control in a low voltage
distribution feeder, as illustrated in Fig. 3. This setup reflects
typical suburban networks. The system parameters are listed
in TABLE I, while the inverter’s setting to provide Volt-Var
based reactive support is provided in TABLE II. It is pertinent
to mention that the inverters are modeled as controlled current
sources. This representation ignores the dynamics of the
inverter control loops, placing emphasis on the voltage support
performance and load-ability limits of the connecting network.
The notation used in the table, for example −20 kV AR @0.85
p.u., refers to the Volt-Var settings of the inverter defined in
Fig. 2, where Qa = −20 kV AR, V a = 0.85 p.u., Qd = 20
kV AR, V d = 1.15 p.u. The loading and reactive power
support for each bus is provided in TABLE III, where positive
values indicate consumption and negative values represent the
generation of active/reactive power.
TABLE I
5-BUS SYSTEM PARAMETERS
E
240 Volts (RMS)
R1, R2, R3, R4
0.07Ω
X1, X2, X3, X4
0.11Ω
TABLE II
VOLT-VAR SETTING FOR HIGHLY LOADED 5-BUS SYSTEM
Bus
QVolt-Var
1
-20 kVAR @0.85 p.u.
2
-20 kVAR @0.85 p.u.
3
-30 kVAR @0.85 p.u.
4
-35 kVAR @0.87 p.u.
TABLE III
KEY PARAMETERS FOR HIGHLY LOADED 5 BUS SYSTEM
Bus
P (kW)
QVolt-Var (kVAR)
|u|(p.u.)
1
25
-20
0.842
2
25
-20
0.802
3
25
-30
0.837
4
24
-33.4
0.872
To enhance the voltage profile, it is assumed that Volt-Var
settings of inverter 4 are further adjusted by its operator. The
updated settings are listed in TABLE IV.
TABLE IV
ADJUSTED VOLT-VAR SETTING FOR HIGHLY LOADED 5 BUS SYSTEM
Bus
∆QVolt-Var
4
-38 kVAR @0.87 p.u.
The simulation results in Figure 4 illustrate the voltage
and reactive power trajectories in response to the changes in
inverter 4 settings. While the voltage at Bus 4 initially rises,
the figure shows that a voltage collapse eventually occurs.
The proposed solvability criteria are applied to assess the
system’s behavior under increased reactive power injection.
The computed values for this scenario are presented in TABLE
V, which indicates that condition 17 is not satisfied. Although
the proposed conditions are sufficient (not necessary), their
violation does not imply insolvability; rather, it flags the need
for a full power flow solution. This highlights the core benefit
of the approach: When satisfied, the conditions enable fast
screening of operating points without iterative computations.
Even when violated, they provide valuable insight into the
proximity to solvability boundaries, offering early warnings
and guiding operational decisions.
TABLE V
COMPUTED PARAMETERS - HIGHLY LOADED 5-BUS SYSTEM
umin
ξ(M)
ξ(ˆ
s)
ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|)
0.8019
2.6466
0.8624
0.3371
L.H.S of (17)
-2.9201
L.H.S of (18)
7.1789
For comparison, the same system is simulated under mod-
erate loading conditions. The initial inverter settings for pro-
viding Volt-Var support, along with the power values at each
bus, are presented in TABLE VI and TABLE VII, respectively.
To enhance the voltage profile, Volt-Var control is adjusted at


--- Page 9 ---
PREPRINT
9
Fig. 3. 5-Bus low-voltage feeder with Volt-Var based reactive power support.
Fig. 4. Reactive power generation via the Volt-Var function adjusted at t=4
seconds, initially increasing voltage before a sudden drop, leading to voltage
breakdown. The slew rate of 3kVAR/sec was used for reactive power injection.
inverter 4, which has further reactive power capacity available.
The updated settings are listed in TABLE VIII.
The results in TABLE IX show that, unlike the previous
case, the system satisfies both conditions (17) and (18),
indicating that the power flow remains solvable after adjusting
the Volt-Var function. The power values along with the voltage
profile are presented in TABLE X.
TABLE VI
VOLT-VAR SETTING FOR MODERATELY LOADED 5-BUS SYSTEM
Bus
QVolt-Var
1
-5 kVAR @0.85 p.u.
2
-5 kVAR @0.85 p.u.
3
-5 kVAR @0.85 p.u.
4
-1.3 kVAR @0.87 p.u.
TABLE VII
KEY PARAMETERS FOR MODERATELY LOADED 5-BUS SYSTEM
Bus
P (kW)
QVolt-Var (kVAR)
|u|(p.u.)
1
10
-1.59
0.952
2
10
-2.63
0.921
3
10
-3.29
0.901
4
10
-1.10
0.889
To this end, for the provision of voltage regulation service
with Volt-Var function and adjusting the inverter settings, the
proposed criteria can be employed to ensure the solvability of
the power flow.
TABLE VIII
ADJUSTED VOLT-VAR SETTING FOR MODERATELY LOADED 5-BUS
SYSTEM
Bus
∆QVolt-Var
4
-3.9 kVAR @0.87 p.u.
TABLE IX
COMPUTED PARAMETERS - MODERATELY LOADED 5-BUS SYSTEM
umin
ξ(M)
ξ(ˆ
s)
ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|)
0.8898
0.2716
0.2323
0.0299
L.H.S of (17)
0.3571
L.H.S of (18)
0.0077
ρ in (19)
0.1347
TABLE X
IMPROVED VOLTAGE PROFILE FOR MODERATELY LOADED 5-BUS SYSTEM
WITH VOLT/VAR CONTROL
Bus
P (kW)
QVolt-Var (kVAR)
|u|(p.u.)
1
10
-1.51
0.955
2
10
-2.46
0.926
3
10
-3
0.910
4
10
-2.93
0.902
B. 37-Bus feeder
This case focuses on assessing solvability in a low-voltage
distribution network under stressed loading conditions. The
structure of the IEEE 37-Bus feeder is shown in Fig. 5. The
base for power is 2.5 MVA and for voltage is 4.8/
p
(3) =
2.77 kV. Buses are numbered in ascending numeric order. A
single phase equivalent of the original distribution network is
used for analysis [43]. In constructing this model, each bus
is loaded with 70% of the maximum phase power observed
in the corresponding three-phase case. The key parameters of
buses prone to voltage deviation are shown in TABLE XI. It
can be observed that multiple buses are at voltages lower than
0.95 p.u. At this point of operation, any further addition of load
will further deteriorate the voltage profile. Providing reactive
power support through Volt-Var control becomes particularly
relevant in the case of further load increment, as illustrated in
TABLE XII.
The proposed solvability certificates are verified, as shown
in TABLE XIII, to support operational decision-making under
Volt-Var control while guaranteeing the existence of a feasible
power flow solution. The effect of increased loading level on
the voltage profiles of the most critical buses is summarized
in TABLE XIV. The table compares bus voltage magnitudes
obtained without Volt-Var support, denoted by ˜
u, and with
active Volt-Var control, denoted by uVV, along with the corre-
sponding voltage-dependent reactive power injections, denoted
by QVolt-Var. The proposed solvability certificate, therefore,
serves as a decision-making tool, certifying whether voltage-
dependent control actions can be safely deployed without
relying on iterative power-flow solvers to converge, thereby
enabling real-time decision-making.
C. 123-Bus feeder
This use case focuses on assessing the solvability of power
flow equations in the IEEE 123-Bus distribution feeder. The
base for power is 5 MVA, and for voltage is 4.16/
p
(3) = 2.4


--- Page 10 ---
PREPRINT
10
Fig. 5. IEEE 37 Bus feeder with location of IBRs programmed with Volt-Var.
TABLE XI
KEY PARAMETERS FOR SELECTED NODES OF 37-BUS FEEDER
Bus
P (kW)
Q (kVAR)
|u| (p.u.)
708
0
0
0.9645
710
0
0
0.9517
711
0
0
0.9465
724
29.4
14.7
0.9747
730
59.5
28
0.9719
732
29.4
14.7
0.964
733
59.5
28
0.9604
734
29.4
14.7
0.9542
735
59.5
28
0.9511
736
29.4
14.7
0.949
737
98
49
0.9494
738
88.2
43.4
0.9475
740
59.5
28
0.9459
741
29.4
14.7
0.9462
TABLE XII
INCREASED ACTIVE POWER LOADING AND VOLT-VAR SETTINGS -
37-BUS
Bus
∆P (KW)
∆QVolt-Var
708
40
-145kVar @ 0.90 p.u.
710
0
0
711
0
0
724
50
-145 kVAR @ 0.90 p.u.
730
0
-145 kVAR @ 0.90 p.u.
732
30
-145 kVAR @ 0.90 p.u.
733
0
0
734
40
0
735
0
0
736
0
0
737
30
-112.5 kVAR @ 0.90 p.u.
738
0
-112.5 kVAR @ 0.90 p.u.
740
0
0
741
0
0
kV. Similarly to the previous case, the equivalent single-phase
model of the grid is loaded with 70% of the maximum phase
power defined at each bus in the original test case. The voltage
TABLE XIII
COMPUTED PARAMETERS -37-BUS
umin
ξ(M)
ξ(ˆ
s)
ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|)
0.9193
0.5116
0.0777
0.0254
L.H.S of (17)
0.3231
L.H.S of (18)
0.0027
ρ in (19)
0.1356
TABLE XIV
VOLTAGE PROFILES AND REACTIVE POWER SUPPORT – 37-BUS
Bus
P (KW)
Q (KVar)
|˜
u| (p.u.)
QVolt-Var (KVAR)
|uVV| (p.u.)
708
0+40
0
0.9568
-46.4771
0.9679
710
0
0
0.9429
0
0.9554
711
0
0
0.9374
0
0.9511
724
29.4+40
14.7
0.9672
-37.4289
0.9742
730
59.5
28
0.9656
-35.5749
0.9755
732
29.4+30
14.7
0.9559
-47.3971
0.9673
733
59.5
28
0.9523
0
0.964
734
29.4+30
14.7
0.9455
0
0.9579
735
59.5
28
0.9424
0
0.9548
736
29.4
14.7
0.9403
0
0.9527
737
98+20
49
0.9404
-52.117
0.9537
738
88.2
43.4
0.9384
-53.9858
0.952
740
59.5
28
0.9369
0
0.9505
741
29.4
14.7
0.9371
0
0.9507
profiles of the most critical buses are shown in TABLE XV.
In this test case, inverters are integrated to maintain all bus
voltages above 0.95 p.u., even under a 5% increase in load at
critical buses. The network layout shown in Fig. 6 highlights
the buses most affected by under voltage conditions, which are
encircled, along with the locations of Volt-Var support capable
IBRs at five designated points.
At this point, the operator decides to turn on the Volt-
Var support at these five designated points. The solvability of
power flow with activated Volt-Var functions with the setting
of -180 kVAR @ 0.90 p.u. and an increase of active power
load is of particular interest.
The proposed solvability certificates are utilized to make
operational decisions for activating Volt–Var control under
increased loading conditions. The parameters calculated for
the corresponding solvability analysis are reported in TABLE
XVI, which guarantees the existence of a feasible power flow
solution. The resulting voltage profiles at the most critical
buses, as well as at buses hosting inverter-based resources un-
der full loading conditions, are summarized in TABLE XVII.
The table compares bus voltage magnitudes obtained without
Volt–Var support, denoted by ˜
u, and with active Volt–Var
control, denoted by uVV, together with the corresponding
voltage-dependent reactive power injections provided by the
inverters, denoted by QVolt-Var. The proposed conditions, there-
fore, serve as an active decision-making tool for enabling or
tuning voltage regulation services.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a novel extension to power flow solv-
ability analysis that incorporates Volt-Var based reactive power
support from IBRs. The proposed framework assists in real-
time decision making under varying operating conditions,
which are often computationally demanding, especially when
evaluating the feasibility of new operating points. The ap-
proach is validated using positive-sequence equivalent mod-


--- Page 11 ---
PREPRINT
11
Fig. 6. IEEE 123-Bus feeder with the highlighted zone most prone to voltage
violation and location of IBRs programmed with Volt/VAR.
TABLE XV
KEY PARAMETERS FOR SELECTED NODES OF 123-BUS FEEDER
Bus
P (KW)
Q (KVAR)
|u| (p.u.)
66
52.5
24.5
0.937333
65
49
35
0.938075
64
52.5
24.5
0.940975
63
28
14
0.944159
62
28
14
0.945965
160
0
0
0.948847
60
14
7
0.948995
61
0
0
0.948995
114
14
7
0.960664
113
28
14
0.960976
TABLE XVI
COMPUTED PARAMETERS - 123-BUS
umin
ξ(M)
ξ(ˆ
s)
ξ(sconst −ˆ
s −M|ˆ
u|)
0.8825
0.4480
0.1260
0.0196
L.H.S of (17)
0.2917
L.H.S of (18)
0.0067
ρ in (19)
0.1049
TABLE XVII
VOLTAGE PROFILES AND REACTIVE POWER SUPPORT - 123-BUS
Bus
P (KW)
Q (KVAR)
˜
u (p.u.)
QVolt-Var(KVAR)
uVV (p.u.)
66
56.25
24.5
0.935985
0
0.950342
65
52.5
35
0.936771
0
0.951116
64
56.25
24.5
0.939784
0
0.954099
63
30
14
0.943108
0
0.957385
62
30
14
0.944997
-73.3477
0.959251
160
0
0
0.948015
0
0.961935
60
15
7
0.948163
-68.2577
0.962079
61
0
0
0.948163
0
0.962079
114
15
7
0.959534
0
0.974202
113
30
14
0.959860
0
0.974524
112
14
7
0.961928
0
0.976567
57
0
0
0.964412
-43.6894
0.975728
54
0
0
0.972312
-32.2065
0.982108
13
0
0
0.990269
-6.4634
0.996409
els of the IEEE 37-bus and 123-bus test feeders. Results
demonstrate that the proposed condition accurately predicts
the existence of power flow solutions under stressed operating
conditions, highlighting its potential for real-time voltage
regulation applications utilizing a network of IBRs. Future
work will focus on reducing conservativeness through tighter
norm bounds and refined normalization, while extending the
proposed solvability framework to explicitly account for un-
balanced multiphase distribution networks.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Simpson-Porco, F. D¨
orfler, and F. Bullo, “Voltage collapse in complex
power grids,” Nat Commun, vol. 7, 10790, 2016.
[2] T. J. Overbye, “A power flow measure for unsolvable cases,” in IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1359-1365, Aug. 1994.
[3] H. Kwatny, A. Pasrija, and L. Bahar, “Static bifurcations in electric power
networks: Loss of steady-state stability and voltage collapse,” in IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems, vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 981-991, Oct.
1986.
[4] Y. Weng, S. Yu, K. Dvijotham, and H. D. Nguyen, “Fixed-Point Theorem-
Based Voltage Stability Margin Estimation Techniques for Distribution
Systems With Renewables,” in IEEE Transactions on Industrial Infor-
matics, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 3766-3776, June 2022.
[5] Z. Wang, B. Cui, and J. Wang, ”A Necessary Condition for Power Flow
Insolvability in Power Distribution Systems With Distributed Generators,”
in IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 1440-1450,
March 2017.
[6] H. Sun et al., ”Review of Challenges and Research Opportunities for
Voltage Control in Smart Grids,” in IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 2790-2801, July 2019.
[7] ”IEEE standard for interconnection and interoperability of distributed
energy resources with associated electric power systems interfaces,” IEEE
Std 1547-2018 (Revision of IEEE Std 1547-2003), pp. 1–138, 2018.
[8] D. Narang, R. Mahmud, M. Ingram, et al., ”An Overview of Issues
Related to IEEE Std 1547-2018 Requirements Regarding Voltage and
Reactive Power Control,” NREL Technical Report, 32 pages, 2021.
[9] T. Van Cutsem and C. Vournas, Voltage Stability Electric Power System.
Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 1998
[10] A. Bernstein, L. Reyes-Chamorro, J.-Y. Le Boudec, and M. Paolone, ”A
composable method for real-time control of active distribution networks
with explicit power setpoints. Part I: Framework,” Electric Power Systems
Research, vol. 125, pp. 254-264, 2015.
[11] H. D. Nguyen, K. Dvijotham, S. Yu, and K. Turitsyn, “A Framework for
Robust Long-Term Voltage Stability of Distribution Systems,” in IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 4827-4837, Sept. 2019.
[12] B. Cui and X. A. Sun, “Solvability of Power Flow Equations
Through Existence and Uniqueness of Complex Fixed Point,” ArXiv, vol.
abs/1904.08855, 2019.
[13] T.-H. Chen, M.-S. Chen, K.-J. Hwang, P. Kotas, and E. A. Chebli,
“Distribution system power flow analysis—A rigid approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1146–1152, Jul. 1991.
[14] C. Wang, A. Bernstein, J. -Y. Le Boudec, and M. Paolone, “Explicit
Conditions on Existence and Uniqueness of Load-Flow Solutions in
Distribution Networks,” in IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 9, no.
2, pp. 953-962, March 2018.
[15] A. Bernstein, C. Wang, E. Dall’Anese, J. -Y. Le Boudec and C. Zhao,
”Load Flow in Multiphase Distribution Networks: Existence, Uniqueness,
Non-Singularity and Linear Models,” in IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 5832-5843, Nov. 2018.
[16] M. Bazrafshan and N. Gatsis, “Convergence of the Z-Bus Method
for Three-Phase Distribution Load-Flow with ZIP Loads,” in IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 153-165, Jan. 2018.
[17] V. Ajjarapu and C. Christy, “The continuation power flow: a tool for
steady state voltage stability analysis,” in IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 416-423, Feb. 1992.
[18] P. S. Nirbhavane, L. Corson, S. M. H. Rizvi and A. K. Srivastava,
”TPCPF: Three-Phase Continuation Power Flow Tool for Voltage Sta-
bility Assessment of Distribution Networks With Distributed Energy
Resources,” in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 57, no.
5, pp. 5425-5436, Sept.-Oct. 2021.
[19] Z. Javid, F. Ul Nazir, W. Zhu, D. Chakravorty, A. Aboushady and M.
Galeela, ”A New Paradigm in IBR Modeling for Power Flow and Short
Circuit Analysis,” in IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 40, no.
6, pp. 5459-5471, Nov. 2025.
[20] Y. Wang, H. Wu, H. Xu, Q. Li and S. Liu, ”A General Fast Power Flow
Algorithm for Transmission and Distribution Networks,” in IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 23284-23293, 2020.
[21] P.-A. Lof, G. Andersson, and D.J. Hill, “Voltage Stability Indices for
Stressed Power Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 326–335, 1993.


--- Page 12 ---
PREPRINT
12
[22] M. Ali, A. Dymarsky, and K. Turitsyn, “Transversality Enforced Newton
Raphson Algorithm for Fast Calculation of Maximum Loadability,” IET
Generation, Transmission & Distribution, vol. 12, 2017.
[23] U.S. Department of Energy, “Analysis and Characterization of Security
Regions in Power Systems,” Systems Engineering for Power IV, Division
of Electric Energy Systems, January 1979, Contract No. C-77-C-01-5011.
[24] H.D. Chiang and M. E. Baran, “On the existence and uniqueness
of load flow solution for radial distribution power networks,” in IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 410-416, March
1990.
[25] F. C. S. E. Hnyilicza and S. T. Y. Lee, “Steady-state security regions:
The set theoretic approach,” in Proc. PICA Conf., 1975, pp. 347-355.
[26] F. D. Galiana, “Analytical Investigation of the Power Flow Equations,”
in 1983 American Control Conference, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1983,
pp. 411-415.
[27] S. Bolognani and S. Zampieri, “On the Existence and Linear Approxi-
mation of the Power Flow Solution in Power Distribution Networks,” in
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 163-172, Jan.
2016.
[28] J. W. Simpson-Porco, ”A Theory of Solvability for Lossless Power Flow
Equations—Part I: Fixed-Point Power Flow,” in IEEE Transactions on
Control of Network Systems, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1361-1372, Sept. 2018.
[29] K. Deimling, Nonlinear Functional Analysis. Berlin, Germany: Springer-
Verlag, 1985.
[30] M.H. Haque, “Load flow solution of distribution systems with voltage
dependent load models,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 36, issue
3, pp. 151-156, 1996.
[31] A. Trias, “The Holomorphic Embedding Load Flow method,” in 2012
IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting, San Diego, CA, USA,
2012, pp. 1-8.
[32] G. Baker and P. Graves-Morris, Pad´
e Approximants, Encyclopedia of
Mathematics and its Applications, Cambridge University Press, 1996.
[33] E. H. Spanier, Algebraic Topology, vol. 55, Ch. 4, Corollary 8. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 1994.
[34] Mathematics Into Type. American Mathematical Society. [Online].
Available: https://www.ams.org/arc/styleguide/mit-2.pdf
[35] Marcos Tostado-V´
eliz, Salah Kamel, Francisco Jurado, Power flow
solution of Ill-conditioned systems using current injection formulation:
Analysis and a novel method, International Journal of Electrical Power
& Energy Systems, Volume 127, 2021, 106669, ISSN 0142-0615.
[36] H. M. Markowitz, “The elimination form of the inverse and its appli-
cation to linear programming,” Manag. Sci., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 255–269,
Apr. 1957.
[37] J. W. Simpson-Porco, ”A Theory of Solvability for Lossless Power
Flow Equations—Part II: Conditions for Radial Networks,” in IEEE
Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1373-
1385, Sept. 2018.
[38] A. Bernstein, C. Wang, E. Dall’Anese, J. -Y. Le Boudec and C. Zhao,
”Load Flow in Multiphase Distribution Networks: Existence, Uniqueness,
Non-Singularity and Linear Models,” in IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 5832-5843.
[39] M. Bazrafshan, N. Gatsis, A. F. Taha, and J. A. Taylor, “Augmenting
the optimal power flow for stability,” in Proc. 55th IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control (CDC), Las Vegas, NV, 2016, pp. 4104-4109
[40] W. H. Kersting, ”Radial distribution test feeders,” in Proc. IEEE PES
Winter Meeting, vol. 2, Columbus, OH, USA, Jan. 2001, pp. 908–912.
[41] W. H. Kersting, ”Radial distribution test feeders,” IEEE Trans. Power
Syst., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 975–985, Aug. 1991.
[42] MathWorks, Simulink, version 24.1, The MathWorks, Inc. [Online].
Available: https://www.mathworks.com/products/simulink.html, 2024.
[43] M. Bazrafshan and N. Gatsis, ”Convergence of the Z-Bus method
and existence of unique solution in single-phase distribution load-flow,”
2016 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing
(GlobalSIP), Washington, DC, USA, 2016, pp. 851-588.
