--- Page 1 ---
1
Frequency Security Assessment in Power Systems
With High Penetration of Renewables Considering
Spatio-Temporal Frequency Distribution
Changjun He, IEEE Member, Hua Geng, IEEE Fellow, Xiuqiang He, IEEE Member, Yushuang Liu, IEEE
Member
Abstract—The increasing integration of renewable energy
sources exacerbates the spatial and temporal differences in
frequency across the power system, posing a serious challenge
to the accurate and efficient assessment of system frequency
security. To address this issue, a generic effective nodal frequency
(ENF) model is first established to concisely characterize nodal
frequency dynamics. This model is featured by the effective nodal
inertia (ENI), damping, and primary regulation parameters,
which retain only the dominant constant component governing
nodal frequency dynamic performance. This model enables the
tractable analytical formulation of nodal frequency trajectory
and the key frequency security indicators. Quantitative analysis
under the temporary power disturbance condition reveals that
the ENI is the most influential parameter governing frequency
security. Consequently, the critical nodal inertia for ensuring
nodal frequency security is analytically derived. A system-level
frequency security index based on the actual ENI and critical
nodal inertia is proposed. On the basis of the proposed index,
the system frequency security assessment is carried out with the
procedure of “offline calculation and online evaluation”, which
is achieved using a lookup table approach and an interpolation
method. Simulations on the modified IEEE 39-bus system verify
the effectiveness of the proposed assessment method.
Index Terms—frequency security, nodal inertia, assessment
index, spatio-temporal frequency distribution, power disturbance
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the increasing penetration of renewable energy
sources (RESs) replacing traditional synchronous gen-
erators (SGs) connected to the power system, the inertia and
frequency regulation capability of the grid are significantly
degraded [1]. This seriously endangers the system frequency
security (SFS) and even lead to catastrophic blackout events
[2]. For example, the UK power grid experienced frequency
dip issues and widespread power outages due to insufficient
inertia on August 9, 2019 [3]. Consequently, system frequency
security assessment (SFSA) is imperative for the safe operation
of power systems with high RES penetration [4]. SFAS is
commonly conducted by checking whether the three main
This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Cen-
tral Universities (B250201245) and the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (U25B20203). (Corresponding author: Hua Geng)
Changjun He is with the School of Electrical and Power Engineering, Hohai
University, Nanjing, 211100 (e-mail: hcj25@hhu.edu.cn).
Hua Geng and Xiuqiang He are with the Department of Automation, Beijing
National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Ts-
inghua University, Beijing, 100084, China (e-mail: genghua@tsinghua.edu.cn;
xhe@tsinghua.edu.cn).
frequency indicators, namely the maximum rate of change of
frequency (RoCoF), the maximum frequency deviation, and
steady-state frequency, remain within the permissible limits
[5]. Existing assessment methods are generally categorized
into three classes: simulation-based methods, data-based meth-
ods, and analytical methods [4].
Simulation-based methods rely on detailed and comprehen-
sive model of each component and control strategy to simulate
system frequency responses under various disturbances. By
examining the frequency trajectories, whether the frequency
indicators violate the security limits is determined. In reference
[6], frequency security in power systems with high penetra-
tion of converter-based RESs is analyzed via electromagnetic
transients simulations. It is found that an all-converter system
exhibits more reliability than the hybrid SG-RES system.
However, the offline nature of these methods limit their
application in real-time online assessment [7]. Besides, if the
power disturbance changes, the simulation must be run again.
Data-driven methods leverage measurement data from pha-
sor measurement units (PMUs) to train intelligence models
(e.g., graph neural networks) for SFSA [5]. While offering
high accuracy, these methods often lack physical interpretabil-
ity and fail to reveal the underlying frequency mechanisms.
In contrast, analytical methods feature clear physical mecha-
nisms and explicit mathematical expressions, making them the
most preferred for SFSA [8]. The average system frequency
(ASF) model and the system frequency response (SFR) model
are the two mainstream analytical frameworks. Based on
the model, the three frequency security indicators is analyt-
ically derived to assess the frequency security. Reference [8]
established a generic ASF model, considering the different
governing systems of the SGs. The maximum frequency
deviation is calculated based on the model to determine the
frequency security. However, the constraints on the other two
indicators — RoCoF and the steady-state frequency — are
ignored. An extended ASF model considering the effects of
frequency deviations on boiler auxiliaries is developed for
SFSA in reference [9], which allows a more accurate SFSA.
In reference [10], an SFR model that considers the virtual
inertia and fast frequency regulation of RESs is constructed.
It is discovered that inertia is significant for SFS and the
minimum inertia to guarantee SFS is derived [11]. A novel
inertia security ratio is defined in [12] as an index for SFS.
Nevertheless, in power systems with high penetration of RESs,
the frequency and inertia feature significant spatiotemporal
arXiv:2604.21262v1  [eess.SY]  23 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
heterogeneity. The frequency responses at different areas and
times are inconsistent [13], [14]. The conventional ASF and
SFR models, which base on the assumption of a uniform
frequency distribution and only analyze the average system
frequency dynamics, are no longer applicable in SFSA. Even
if the system average dynamic performance meets the security
criteria, localized frequency violations may exceeds the limit
and lead to frequency security issues, as shown in Fig.1.
Reference [15] explores the dynamic inertia of each node,
considering the spatiotemporal heterogeneity of inertia distri-
bution. An SFSA index base on dynamic inertia contribution
is developed. However, the performance of the three frequency
security indicators is unclear.
To fill the research gap, this paper developed a frequency
security index for online SFSA based on the nodal inertia,
accounting for the spatiotemporal distribution of frequency
dynamics. The main contributions are summarized as follows:
(1) Frequency modeling: To characterize the frequency
performance of individual nodes while circumventing
the complexity of time-varying parameters, a generic
effective nodal frequency (ENF) model is established.
This model simplifies the nodal frequency dynamics
using constant effective parameters, including effective
nodal inertia (ENI), damping, and primary regulation.
(2) Frequency mechanism: Based on the ENF model,
analytical expressions are derived for nodal frequency
trajectories and the three frequency security indicators.
Quantitative analysis shows that the ENI has the great-
est influence on nodal frequency security performance
compared to other parameters.
(3) Security index: The critical nodal inertia required to
maintain frequency security is analytically calculated. A
system-level frequency security index is then constructed
based on the actual ENI and critical nodal inertia.
(4) Assessment method: An “offline calculation and online
evaluation” strategy is designed using a lookup table ap-
proach, enabling accurate and rapid SFSA that considers
the spatiotemporal frequency distribution.
Simulations are conducted on the modified IEEE 39-bus
system to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.
II. SIMPLIFIED MODELING OF FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION
A power system with high penetration of RESs is shown
in Fig.1. The generators contain traditional SGs, grid-forming
(GFM) inverters, and grid-following (GFL) inverters. Suppose
there are n SGs, m GFMs, and l GFLs, with p main nodes.
A. Time-varying Nodal Frequency Model
Basically, the frequency dynamics of all SGs, GFL devices,
and GFM devices can be converter into the form as the SFR
model [16]. Consequently, all nodes’ frequency dynamics can
also be represented as the SFR model as below.
2Hj (t) dωj (t)
dt
= ∆Pi −Dj (t) (ωj (t) −ω0) −g (t)
(1a)
τj (t) dg (t)
dt
= Kj (t) (ωj (t) −ω0) −g (t)
(1b)
SG 1
GFM 1
GFL 2
Load
N1
N2
N4
Np
GFM m
SG n
……
……
GFL 1 N3
GFL l
unsafe
unsafe
……
Fig. 1.
Topology and frequency distribution of a power system integrated
with high penetration of RESs.
where t represents the time variable. ∆Pi represents the
power disturbance at node i. This also presents the imbalance
between the power generation and consumption. ωj(t) is the
frequency of node j. g(t) is the equivalent primary regulation
power of the node j. Hj(t), Dj(t), Kj(t), and τj(t) are
the equivalent inertia, damping, primary regulation, and time-
delay of node j when there is a power disturbance at node i,
respectively. These parameters for the node j are dependent on
those parameters of the generators (SGs, GFLs, and GFMs), as
well as their capability combinations and the system structures.
Considering that the corresponding parameters of the GFL and
GFM are non-constant under the influence of multi-timescale
control strategies, as well as the volatility of renewables,
Hj(t), Dj(t), Kj(t), and τj(t) are also time-varying. The
time-varying nodal inertia (Hj(t)) and the frequency dynamics
(ωj(t)) of the node j are drawn in the blue box in Fig. 2. It
is evident that the effective nodal inertia and the associated
nodal frequency both exhibit complex behaviors.
B. Proposed Effective Nodal Frequency Model
Regarding that the time-varying model is difficult to ana-
lyze, the ENI, the effective nodal damping, the effective nodal
primary regulation, and effective time delay are defined. These
parameters are constant components of the actual time-varying
parameters and play the most important role in frequency
dynamic performance. As the same, the ENF is defined
corresponding to the effective parameters.
Hj (t) = ¯
Hj + hj(t)
(2a)
Dj (t) = ¯
Dj + dj(t)
(2b)
Kj (t) = ¯
Kj + kj(t)
(2c)
τj (t) = ¯
τj + ej(t)
(2d)
ωj(t) = ¯
ωj(t) + wj(t)
(2e)
where ¯
Hj, ¯
Dj, ¯
Kj, and ¯
τj are the constant effective frequency
regulation parameters of the node j. hj(t), dj(t), kj(t), and
ej(t) are the remaining time-varying components. ¯
ωj(t) is the
ENF. wj(t) is the remaining high-frequency component of
the nodal frequency trajectory. The relationship between the


--- Page 3 ---
3
Time t
0
0
0
ω0
Hij
Time t
ω0
Time t
Time t
0
Time t
Time t
0
0
Remaining frequency
Time-varying component of inertia
Nodal inertia Hj(t)
Nodal inertia Hj(t)
Nodal frequency ωj(t)
Nodal frequency ωj(t)
Effective nodal inertia Hj
Effective nodal inertia Hj
Effective nodal frequency ωj(t)
Effective nodal frequency ωj(t)
Fig. 2. The actual nodal inertia/frequency, the effective nodal inertia/frequency, and the remaining components.
effective nodal parameters and the ENF is called the effective
nodal frequency model.
2 ¯
Hj
d¯
ωj (t)
dt
= ∆Pi −¯
Dj (¯
ωj (t) −ω0) −¯
gj (t)
(3a)
¯
τj
d¯
gj (t)
dt
= ¯
Kj (¯
ωj (t) −ω0) −¯
gj (t)
(3b)
where ¯
gj is donated as the effective primary regulation
power of the node j. In Fig.2, the actual nodal iner-
tia/frequency, the effective nodal inertia/frequency, and the
remaining sine/cosine component of the inertia/frequency are
drawn. It can be seen that the effective nodal frequency retains
the core dynamics characteristics that play the most important
role in system frequency security. The ENF model could
balance conciseness and accuracy, which enables conduct-
ing analytical calculations. Besides, the frequency regulation
parameters, such as the ENI, are constant and suitable for
engineering practice.
III. DATA-BASED ANALYSIS OF NODAL FREQUENCY
This section studies the analytical expressions of the ENF
model using the Laplace transform method and the node-
specific frequency trajectory base on the power/frequency data.
A. Unified Analytical Solution for ENF Model
The power disturbances can be divided into two categories
when considering frequency stability: permanent and tempo-
rary power disturbances. The former usually contains a sudden
cut off of loads or generators. The latter typically occurs when
there is a ground fault or a temporary circuit interruption.
1) Permanent Power Disturbance Scenarios: When the
load at node i is increased by ∆P, or when the power
generation at node i suddenly decreases by ∆P. there will
be a power disturbance of ∆Pi = −∆P. Accordingly, the
solution for the ENF model (3) is derived using the Laplace
transforms method as (4) [17]. More details are in Appendix.
¯
ωj(t) = ω0 +
∆Pi
¯
Dj + ¯
Kj
 1 −e−λt (cos ωdt −A1 sin ωdt)

(4)
where λ, ωd, and A1 are calculated in Appendix.
2) Temporary Power Disturbances Scenarios: Some distur-
bances, such as a grid fault, will arouse a temporary power
disturbance. The transient process is more complicated, which
can be divided into four stages, as shown in Fig.3.
(1) Pre-fault phase (0 ≤t ≤tf). The nodal frequency runs
stably at ¯
ωj(t) = ω0 during the pre-fault stage.
(2) Fault-on phase (tf < t ≤tc). The fault occurs at tf and
clears at tc. During this stage, the voltage dip leads to a
power consumption decrease on the loads of ∆Pload =
(1 −aU 2
f −bUf −c)Pload0. Uf is the fault voltage and
Pload0 is the nominal load power consumption. a, b, c
are the proportions of the resistive load, current load
and power load, respectively. a + b + c = 1. Besides,
id = 0(PGFL = 0) is the usually used strategy for
GFLs during grid faults, resulting in a power generation
0
(a)
(c)
0
tf
tc
ωnadir, j
Uf
tnadir
0
PGFL
(b)
Pload
PG + PGFM
ω0
U0
-
Pload0
Pre-fault phase
Post-fault phase
Fault-on phase
Fault-recovery phase
tr
Fig. 3. Transient process under the temporary power disturbances scenario.
(a) Grid voltage. (b) Active power. (c) Nodal Frequency


--- Page 4 ---
4
¯
ωj (t) =









ω0, 0 ≤t ≤tf
ω0 + K2
 1 −e−λ(t−tf)(cos (ωd (t −tf)) −A1 sin (ωd (t −tf)))

, tf < t ≤tc
ω0 + C1 (t −tc) + C2 + e−λ(t−tc)(Acos cos (ωd (t −tc)) + Asin sin (ωd (t −tc))), tc < t ≤tr
ω0 + e−λ(t−tr) 
¯
ωj (tr) cos(ωd(t −tr))+
¯
ω′
j(tr)+λ¯
ωj(tr)
ωd
sin(ωd(t −tr))

, t > tr
(5)
reduction of ∆Pgene = −PGFL0. PGFL0 is the active
power of all GFLs before the fault. The mechanical
power of SGs and the power reference of GFMs remain
unchanged. As a result, the power disturbance during the
fault-on stage is a constant value of ∆Pi2 = ∆Pgene +
∆Pload = −PGFL0 + (1 −aU 2
f −bUf −c)Pload0.
(3) Fault-recovery phase (tc < t ≤tr). After the fault
is cleared at time tc, power consumption of the load
soon recovers back to the pre-fault value of Pload0.
The active power of the GFL recovers at a ramp of
rp (pu/s). Therefore, the power imbalance is ∆Pi3 =
[rp(t −tc)–1]PGFL0 at this stage.
(4) Post-fault phase (t > tr). The power imbalance is equal
to 0 at tr = tc + 1/rp), i.e. ∆Pi4 = 0. The nodal
frequency finally recovers to the rated value through the
action of the inertia, damping, and primary regulation.
Accordingly, the whole fault process is plotted in Fig.3. The
analytical time-domain solution under the temporary power
disturbance condition is derived using the Laplace method as
(5). More details are shown in Appendix.
B. Data-Based Calculation for Nodal Frequency
To obtain the frequency distribution across the grid. The
specific expression of the ENF dynamics of each node is
required. A data-based dynamics fitting approach based on the
simplex method is proposed to obtain the frequency dynamics
of each node, along with the ENI, damping, and primary
frequency regulation parameters. The flow can be divided into
5 steps, as plotted in Fig.4.
1) Step 1: Data Acquisition and Node Number Initializa-
tion: First, input the system parameters (such as node num-
bers, generator numbers/types) and the disturbance conditions
(disturbance type, location node Ni, and magnitude). Using the
PMUs to acquire the frequency dynamics data of each node.
Initialize the node number as j = 1.
2) Step 2: ENF Model Initialization: Filter the frequency
response curve of node j to eliminate the measurement noise.
Then substitute the initial frequency regulation parameters of
xpa,j =
 ¯
Hj0, ¯
Dj0, ¯
Kj0, ¯
τj0

into (5) to determine the initial
ENF model of the node j.
3) Step 3: Parameters Update: Calculate the loss function
floss of the node j, which represents the error between the
actual nodal frequency and the ENF (the expression of floss
will be explained later). If the loss function converges, the ENF
model of the node Nj is obtained and go to Step 4. Otherwise,
if the loss function is not converged, calculate the change value
of the parameters with ∆xup,j =

∆¯
Hj, ∆¯
Dj, ∆¯
Kj, ∆¯
τj

using the simplex method. The updated frequency regulation
parameters vector is iterated as xpa,j = xpa,j + ∆xup,j. Then,
update the ENF model and return to the start of Step 3.
Step 1
Update xpa,j=xpa,j+∆xup,j and the ENF model
N
N
j=j+1
Y
End
 
Filter noise of the frequency dynamics of node j
 
Substitute the parameters xpa,j = [Hj0, Dj0, Kj0, τj0] 
into the ENF model of node j
Calculate the loss 
function floss and check 
for convergence?
Obtain the ENF model for node j
Obtain the ENF models for all nodes across the 
grid using interpolation method
j=p?
  
Y
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 2
START
START
Initialize the node number as  j=1 
Initialize the node number as  j=1 
Input system parameters and calculate disturbance 
conditions to determine the unified ENF model
Calculate the change value ∆xup,j
Fig. 4. Flow of data-based calculation for nodal frequency.
The loss function floss: When conducting the frequency
security assessment, the main focus is on whether the three
critical indicators, i.e. RoCoF (denoted as Rmax), the maxi-
mum frequency deviation (denoted as ωnadir), and the steady-
state frequency (denoted as ωsteady), exceed the limits. Con-
sequently, in addition to the alignment between the ENF dy-
namics and the actual node frequency dynamics, the accuracy
of these three key indicators is also of great importance.
The ENF dynamics must not only closely match the actual
nodal frequency dynamics but also capture these indicators.
The maximum RoCoF usually occurs at the moment of the
disturbance. In engineering practice, the RoCoF is typically
calculated by taking the frequencies at two adjacent time
points with a small time interval. Therefore, the frequencies
of ωj(tf) at time tf and ωj(tRoCoF) at tRoCoF (tRoCoF −tf


--- Page 5 ---
5
is about 100–200 ms) determine the maximum RoCoF as
Rmax = (ωj(tRoCoF) −ωj(tf))/(tRoCoF −tf). Since the
frequency at tf is equal to the nominal frequency, Rmax is
only determined by the accuracy of ωj(tRoCoF). Based on
this, the loss function floss is proposed as follows.
floss =k1
R t1
tf

∥¯
ωj (t) −ωj (t)∥2
dt
t1 −tf
+ k2∥¯
ωj (tRoCoF) −ωj (tRoCoF)∥2
+ k3


arg min
t
{¯
ωj (t)} −arg min
t {ωj (t)}



2
+ k4∥min{¯
ωj (t)} −min{ωj (t)}∥2
+ k5∥¯
ωj (t∞) −ωj (t∞)∥2
(6)
where
t1
denotes
the
end
time
of
the
curve
fitting.
k1, k2, k3, k4, and k5 are the fitting coefficients for frequency
dynamics, maximum RoCoF, time of the maximum frequency
deviation, the maximum frequency deviation, and steady-state
frequency, respectively.
4) Step 4: Node Number Update: If j is equal to p, skip to
Step 5. Otherwise, if j is not equal to p, j = j + 1 and return
to the start of Step 2.
5) Step 5: Supplement of Frequency Distribution: Suppos-
ing the node Nm is directly connected near to a set of nodes
denoted as Q, then the frequency regulation parameters of the
nodal Nm (xpa,m =
 ¯
Hm, ¯
Dm, ¯
Km, ¯
τm

) can be calculated
using the interpolation method, as (7) shown.
xpa,m =
P
q∈Q
xpa,q
lmq
P
q∈Q
1
lmq
(7)
where xpa,q =
 ¯
Hq, ¯
Dq, ¯
Kq, ¯
τq

is the frequency regulation
parameters vector for the node Nq. lmq is the transmission
line length between the nodes Nm and Nq. Finally, the ENF
model of any node is determined based on (3).
C. Validation of ENF Model Accuracy
Simulations are conducted in the modified IEEE 39-bus
system with high penetration of RESs, with the topology
shown in Fig.7 and parameters depicted in TABLE II in
Section V. Analysis above shows that the temporary power dis-
turbance conditions are more complicated than the permanent
power disturbance conditions. Hereafter, the temporary power
disturbance condition is studied as an example for analysis.
The frequencies of the nodes N1 and N16 are plotted in Fig.5
(a) and (b), respectively. The actual nodal frequency and the
ENF trajectories are drawn with red solid lines and blue dashed
lines, respectively. It implies that the actual nodal frequency
exhibits complex dynamics with superimposed high-frequency
components. The ENF is simpler while retaining the key
frequency security indicators and frequency dynamics. The
overall trend is effectively captured by the ENF trajectory.
TABLE I show the errors (equation (5)) of all the 39 nodes,
with the maximum error occurs at node N38 of 2.29 %. This
confirm that the ENF accurately captures both the transient
frequency dynamics and key frequency security indicators.
49.2
49.4
49.6
49.8
50
0
1
2
3
4
5
(a) 
(b) 
Actual nodal frequency
Effective nodal frequency
Frequency (Hz)
Time (s)
Time (s)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Fig. 5. The actual nodal frequency and ENF at nodes (a) N1 and (b) N16.
TABLE I
ERRORS BETWEEN ACTUAL NODAL FREQUENCY AND ENF
Node
N1
N2
N3
N4
N5
N6
N7
N8
Error (%)
1.85
1.84
1.84
1.84
1.85
1.85
1.85
1.85
Node
N9
N10
N11
N12
N13
N14
N15
N16
Error (%)
1.85
1.84
1.84
1.84
1.84
1.84
1.83
1.83
Node
N17
N18
N19
N20
N21
N22
N23
N24
Error (%)
1.84
1.84
1.81
1.80
1.82
1.82
1.82
1.82
Node
N25
N26
N27
N28
N29
N30
N31
N32
Error (%)
1.84
1.82
1.83
1.98
2.08
1.85
1.85
1.83
Node
N33
N34
N35
N36
N37
N38
N39
Error (%)
1.81
1.87
1.83
1.82
1.84
2.29
1.85
IV. SYSTEM FREQUENCY SECURITY ASSESSMENT BASED
ON NODAL INERTIA
A. Analysis on Key Frequency Security Indicators
As is known, the frequency security is assessed based
on three main indicators: maximum ROCOF, the maximum
frequency deviation, and steady-state frequency.
1) Maximum RoCoF: Based on (5), the maximum RoCoF
of the node j is derived as follows.
Rmax,j ≈¯
Rmax,j = ∆Pi2
¯
Hj
(8)
2) Maximum Frequency Deviation: Take the frequency
drop case as an example, the maximum frequency deviation
can be calculated by taking the smallest of the four stage min-
imums. Ignore the error between the actual nodal frequency
and the ENF, the maximum frequency deviation of the node
j is calculated as follows.
ωnadir,j ≈¯
ωnadir,j = min {ω0, ¯
ωj (tm2) , ¯
ωj (tm3) , ¯
ωj (tm4)}
(9)
where tm2, tm3, and tm4 are the times of the minimum
frequency in fault-on, fault-recovery, and post-fault phases, re-
spectively. Their analytical expression are shown in Appendix
B. The analytical expression of the frequency nadir point can
also be found in Appendix.
3) Steady-State Frequency: After a temporary power distur-
bance, both of the generation power and the load consumption
will recover to the pre-fault values. Consequently, the steady-
state frequency is equal to the nominal frequency.


--- Page 6 ---
6
B. Sensitivity Analysis of Frequency Regulation Parameters
The four frequency regulation parameters govern the nodal
frequency dynamics and the frequency security indicators. The
unit-less sensitivity values of the maximum RoCoF to the four
parameters are derived as (10) based on (8).
SR,j =







∂Rmax,j
∂¯
Hj
·
¯
Hj
Rmax,j
∂Rmax,j
∂¯
Dj
·
¯
Dj
Rmax,j
∂Rmax,j
∂¯
Kj
·
¯
Kj
Rmax,j
∂Rmax,j
∂¯
τj
·
¯
τj
Rmax,j







=




−
∆Pi2
¯
Hj ¯
Rmax,j
0
0
0




(10)
where SR,j is the sensitivity matrix of the maximum RoCoF
to the regulation parameters. The result is plotted in Fig.6(a).
It can be seen that the sensitivity of the nodal inertia relative
to the maximum RoCoF is the largest. While the sensitivity
of other parameters is equal to zero.
Similarly, the unit-less sensitivity matrix of the maximum
frequency deviation to the parameters is derived baed on (9).
Snadir,j =







∂ωnadir,j
∂¯
Hj
·
¯
Hj
ωnadir,j
∂ωnadir,j
∂¯
Dj
·
¯
Dj
ωnadir,j
∂ωnadir,j
∂¯
Kj
·
¯
Kj
ωnadir,j
∂ωnadir,j
∂¯
τj
·
¯
τj
ωnadir,j







(11)
where Snadir,j is the sensitivity matrix of the maximum
frequency deviation to the regulation parameters. Since the
analytical solutions of (11) are difficult to get, the values are
calculated using numerical methods, as shown in Fig.6(b).
It can be seen that the maximum frequency deviation is far
more sensitive to the ENI than to other frequency regulation
parameters. Regarding that the same conclusion holds for the
maximum RoCoF and the steady-state frequency is constant.
The ENI is therefore chosen as the most important parameter
that determines the frequency security indicators.
C. Critical Nodal Inertia for Frequency Security
1) Constraint of Maximum RoCoF: Considering the max-
imum RoCoF constraint, the absolute value of the maximum
RoCoF of each node should not exceed the threshold.
|Rmax,j| ≤Rth, ∀j ∈N
(12)
(a) 
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
Hj
Dj
Kj
τj
Hj
Dj
Kj
τj
(b) 
×10
-2
×10
-2
×10
-2
×10
-2
Fig. 6. Unit-less sensitivity of (a) the maximum RoCoF and (b) the maximum
frequency deviation to the four frequency regulation parameters.
where N is the set of key nodes and Rth is the RoCoF thresh-
old value. Equation (12) can be converted to the constraint on
the nodal inertia based on (8).
¯
Hj ≥HR = |∆Pi2|
Rth
, ∀j ∈N
(13)
where HR is the critical nodal inertia constrained by the
RoCoF requirement.
2) Constraint of Maximum Frequency Deviation: Require-
ment on the Maximum frequency deviation is described as,
ωnadir,j ≥ωth, ∀j ∈N
(14)
where ωth is the minimum allowable frequency. Denote the
relationship between the minimum nodal frequency and the
ENI as χj based on (9).
ωnadir,j
∆
= χj
  ¯
Hj

, j ∈N
(15)
Then the constraint of (14) can be converted into (16).
¯
Hj ≥Hj,dev = χ−1
j
(ωth) , ∀j ∈N
(16)
where Hj,dev is the critical nodal inertia constrained by the
maximum frequency deviation.
3) Constraint of Steady-State Frequency: According to the
analysis in Section IV-A, the steady-state frequency will finally
recover to the nominal value. The steady-state frequency
requirement has therefore always been met.
In summary, to satisfy the requirements on the three fre-
quency security indicators, the ENI of all nodes should both
met (13) and (16). That is,
¯
Hj ≥Hj,cri = max {HR, Hj,dev} , ∀j ∈N
(17)
where Hj,cri is the critical nodal inertia to satisfy the frequency
security requirements.
D. Proposed Frequency Security Index
The node frequency security index of the node j is proposed
based on the node inertia, donated as κj.
κj =
¯
Hj −Hj,cri
Hj,cri
× 100%, j ∈N
(18)
The system frequency safety shall be determined by the
weakest node within the system. Therefore, the frequency
security index for the whole power system, donated as κ, is
represented by the minimum nodal frequency security index.
κ = min {κj} , j ∈N
(19)
The value of the index κ could represent the system fre-
quency safety:
1) κ > 0: This means that the actual effective inertia of
all nodes is larger than the critical inertia. The nodal inertia
is significant enough to guarantee the frequency security.
Therefore, the system is frequency safe in this case. The larger
the index κi, the safer the system is.
2) κ = 0: One or all of the frequency dynamics indicators
have reached the allowable boundary, the system maintains
critical frequency safety.


--- Page 7 ---
7
3) κ < 0: The effective nodal inertia of at least one node
does not meet the frequency security requirements. This makes
the system unsafe.
E. Procedure of Frequency Security Assessment
The frequency security assessment process is called “offline
calculation and online assessment”, which is shown in Fig.7.
First, numerous simulations should be conducted on the sys-
tem to obtain the frequency dynamics of all nodes across the
system under different disturbances. Or enough measurement
data needs to be gained in the real system. Based on the
frequency/power data, the ENI and the critical nodal inertia
are calculated based on the data-based fitting method proposed
in Section III. Then the offline table of ENI and the critical
inertia of all nodes under different scenarios are formed.
Second, the type, location, and size of the disturbance are
identified based on the online measurement data from the PMU
equipment [18].
Third, identify the operating conditions in the offline table
that are close to the online operating condition. Then, calculate
the ENI and the critical nodal inertia for this online operating
condition by applying a weighting based on the Euclidean
distance, according to (20).
Hon =
P
r∈C
Hoff,r
∥Lon−r∥2
P
r∈C
1
∥Lon−r∥2
(20)
where Hon and Hoff,r is the effective/critical nodal inertia of
the online case and the offline case, respectively. C is the
union of the offline operating condition cases in the offline
table that are close to the online operating case. ∥Lon−r∥2 is
the Euclidean distance between the online case and the offline
case nearby.
Start
Perform simulations and calculations to obtain the 
offline tables of the distribution of ENI and critical 
nodal inertia under different scenarios 
Acquire the online disturbance type, location, and 
size based on the PMU equipment 
Calculate the online ENI of all nodes, along with the 
critical nodal inertia, based on the offline tables
Solve for the system frequency security index and 
determine whether it is frequency safe.
End
Fig. 7. Flowchart of the “offline calculation and online assessment” procedure.
Finally, the system frequency security index is obtained
based on (19). The system is then evaluated to determine
whether it is frequency safe.
The advantages of the proposed methods are listed as below.
(1) The nodal inertia-based frequency security index fea-
tures a simple calculation process, which is highly
suitable for online frequency security assessment in
engineering practice.
(2) The method is applicable to any disturbance condition,
including unforeseen events not covered in the offline
dataset, with strong generalization and robustness.
(3) The weak nodes that dominate system frequency secu-
rity can be identified. This could provide quantitative
guidance for generation configuration and optimization.
V. CASE STUDIES
Simulations are conducted in the modified IEEE 39-bus sys-
tem, which is depicted in Fig.8. Parameters of the generations
are shown in TABLE II.
M
10
L8
G9
M7
G4
G5
L6
M3
L2
G
SG
L
GFL
M
GFM
30
2
1
39
9
8
7
5
4
37
25
3
18
26
27
28
29
38
17
15
14
13
12
6
11
10
32
31
34
33
20
19
24
23
22
35
36
21
16
30
2
1
39
9
8
7
5
4
37
25
3
18
26
27
28
29
38
17
15
14
13
12
6
11
10
32
31
34
33
20
19
24
23
22
35
36
21
16
L1
L1
Fig. 8. Modified IEEE 39-bus system.
A. Critical Nodal Inertia and ENI Results
Take case II as an example, the critical nodal inertia
constraint by the frequency security is plotted with the red line
in Fig.9. It can be seen that the critical nodal inertia ranges
from 2.4 s to 3 s. The allowable inertia range to satisfy the
frequency security requirement is drawn with green. Similarly,
the online ENIs of the 39 nodes are also drawn in Fig.9
with the blue line. It can be seen that the inertia of the node
N37 is the lowest of about 2.1 s, and the inertia of the node
N30 is the highest of about 3.6 s. The difference in inertia


--- Page 8 ---
8
TABLE II
PARAMETERS OF ALL GENERATORS
Parameter
L1
L2
M3
G4
G5
P (MW)
501.2
250.5
611
1000
510
T (s)
–
–
0.5
1
5 (case I)
3 (case II)
D (pu/pu)
–
–
20
6
6
Kpri (pu/pu)
–
–
–
20
20
τ (s)
–
–
–
1
1
Parameter
L6
M7
L8
G9
M10
P (MW)
650.6
576
540.7
830
561
T (s)
–
0.5
–
10 (case I)
6 (case II)
0.5
D (pu/pu)
–
20
–
6
20
Kpri (pu/pu)
–
–
–
20
–
τ (s)
–
–
–
1
–
Satisfy frequency security
Not satisfy frequency security
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35 39
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Nodal inertia [s]
Node Number
Nodal inertia that satisfies the 
frequency security requirement
Critical nodal inertia Hj,cri
ENI Hj
Fig. 9. The critical nodal inertia and ENI results of the online case II.
between different nodes reaches 1.5 s, which is approximately
70 % of the nodal inertia of the node N37. This indicates that
there are significant differences in the inertia levels across
different regions. Comparing the ENI and the critical nodal
inertia, whether the frequency security is satisfied at this node
is concluded. The ENIs of the nodes N33, N37, and N39
are smaller than the corresponding critical inertia. Therefore,
frequency security problems would occur in these nodes/areas.
B. Frequency Security Assessment Results
The maximum RoCoFs of all 39 nodes in case I are plotted
with blue diamonds in Fig.10 (a). The maximum frequency
deviation of case I is drawn with blue diamonds in Fig.11 (a).
These results show that the frequency security indicators of all
nodes are within the allowable range, indicating the system is
frequency safe in case I. The frequency security assessment
results using the proposed method in this paper is displayed
in Fig.12 (a). The frequency security index κ is larger than
zero. Based on the analysis in Section IV-D, the system is
evaluated to be frequency safe with the proposed method,
Maximum RoCoF [Hz/s]
Node number
(a)
(b)
Node number
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
1
10
20
30
39 1
10
20
30
39
Rth
Rth
Fig. 10. Maximum RoCoF under (a) case I and (b) case II.
Frequency nadir [Hz]
Node number
(a)
(b)
ωth
48
49
50
Node number
1
10
20
30
39
1
10
20
30
39 1
10
20
30
39
1
10
20
30
39
Fig. 11. The maximum frequency deviation under (a) case I and (b) case II.
which is consistent with the simulation results of Fig.10 (a)
and Fig.11 (a).
Compared to case I, the inertia of the G5 is reduced from
5 s to 3 s, and the inertia of the G9 is decreased from 10 s to
6 s in case II. The maximum RoCoF and frequency deviation
results of case II are depicted in Fig.10 (b) and Fig.11 (b),
respectively. These results suggest that the RoCoF is obeyed
in node N33, N37,and N39, even though the maximum fre-
quency deviation of all nodes met the requirements. Therefore,
frequency security problems would occur in this case. Fig.12
(b) shows the assessment result using the proposed method.
The frequency security index of the whole system is found
to be smaller than zero, indicating that the system is not
able to maintain frequency security. Furthermore, this method
identified the weak area which is near nodes N33, N37, and
N39. To prevent from system frequency security problems,
the frequency stability of these nodes, especially the node
N37, should be improved using inertia-boosting strategies such
as adding energy storage and increasing the inertia control
parameters of inverters.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
As low-inertia converter-controlled RESs replaces tradi-
tional SGs featuring large rotor inertia, frequency security
of power systems with high penetration of RESs is facing
a serious challenge. The frequency is more susceptible to
disturbances, and the spatial-temporal heterogeneity of re-
gional frequency responses is further exacerbated, making it


--- Page 9 ---
9
Node number
0
Node number
(a)
Frequency security index
κ1
(b)
1
10
20
30 ... 39
1
10
20
30 ... 39
κ2
..
.
..
.
Fig. 12. SFSA results of (a) cases I and (b) case II.
more difficult to accurately assess the frequency security. To
address this issues, an online frequency security assessment
method considering the spatio-temporal frequency distribution
is proposed in this paper, with nodal inertia as the core
characterization parameter. A simplified generic ENF model
is built with constant effective parameters that dominate the
nodal frequency characteristics, ensuring both model sim-
plicity and the retention of essential frequency dynamics.
Based on the model, the analytical expressions for the nodal
frequency trajectory and the frequency security indicators are
derived. The ENI is then discovered to have the most important
influence on the frequency security. Consequently, the critical
nodal inertia to meet the frequency security requirement is
then calculated. An index integrating the ENI and the nodal
critical inertia is proposed for assessing frequency security,
which considers the frequency distribution and outperforms
traditional average methods that ignore spatial heterogeneity.
When applied to online scenarios, an interpolation method
is employed to quickly determine the ENI and critical nodal
inertia based on offline lookup tables, thereby developing an
offline calculation and online assessment” method for SFSA.
APPENDIX
ANALYTICAL EXPRESSION OF GENERIC ENF MODEL AND
MAXIMUM NODAL FREQUENCY DEVIATION
Denote ∆¯
ωj as the difference between the effective fre-
quency of the node j and the nominal frequency. That is,
∆¯
ωj = ¯
ωj −ω0
(A.21)
Based on (3), the closed-loop transfer function from the
power disturbance to the frequency difference is given.
G∆ω(s)
G∆P (s) =
¯
τjs + 1
2¯
τj ¯
Hjs2 + (¯
τj ¯
Dj + 2 ¯
Hj)s + ¯
Dj + ¯
Kj
(A.22)
I. Permanent Power Disturbance
The Laplace function of the power disturbance is G∆P (s) =
∆Pi/s. Therefore, the time-domain solution of the frequency
difference is derived as,
∆¯
ωj(t) = L−1
 G∆ω(s)
G∆P (s)
∆Pi
s

(A.23)
The ENF dynamics are then solved as,
¯
ωj(t) = ω0+
∆Pi
¯
Dj + ¯
Kj
·

1 −e−λ(t−tf) · (cos (ωd (t −tf))
−A1 sin (ωd (t −tf)))

(A.24)
where λ, ωd, and A1 are all constants.
λ = ¯
τj ¯
Dj+2 ¯
Hj
4¯
τj ¯
Hj
ωd =
√
8¯
τj ¯
Hj( ¯
Dj+ ¯
Kj)−(¯
τj ¯
Dj+2 ¯
Hj)2
4¯
τj ¯
Hj
A1 =
2¯
τj ¯
Kj−¯
τj ¯
Dj−6 ¯
Hj
√
8¯
τj ¯
Hj( ¯
Dj+ ¯
Kj)−(¯
τj ¯
Dj+2 ¯
Hj)2
(A.25)
II. Temporary Power Disturbance
The nodal frequency dynamics can be divided into four pe-
riods: pre-fault, fault-on, fault-recovery, and post-fault phases.
(1) Pre-fault phase (0 ≤t ≤tf). In this stage, the (effective)
nodal frequency remains at the nominal frequency.
¯
ωj(t) = ω0, 0 ≤t ≤tf
(A.26)
(2) Fault-on phase (tf < t ≤tc). Based on the analysis in
Section III-A, the power deficit is a constant of ∆Pi2 in this
stage. The ENF dynamics have the same form as (A.25).
¯
ωj(t) = ω0+K2·

1 −e−λ(t−tf)·
(cos (ωd (t −tf)) −A1 sin (ωd (t −tf)))

(A.27)
where K2 = ∆Pi2/( ¯
Dj + ¯
Kj). The time derivative of the
frequency dynamics (A.27) in this stage is calculated as,
¯
ω′
j(t) = K2e−λ(t−tf) ·
 (λ + A1ωd) cos (ωd(t −tf)) +
(ωd −λA1) sin (ωd(t −tf))

(A.28)
Find the time t∗
2 at which the frequency derivative is zero.
t∗
2 = tf + 1
ωd

kπ −arctan λ + A1ωd
λA1 −ωd

, k ∈RN
(A.29)
where RN is the set of integers. If there exists an minimum in-
teger k that satisfies t∗
2 ∈[tf, tc], tm2 = t∗
2. Otherwise, if there
is no k satisfying t∗
2 ∈[tf, tc], tm2 = arg min {¯
ωj(tf), ¯
ωj(tc)}.
(3) Fault-recovery phase (tc < t ≤tr). According to the
analysis in Section III-A, The power deficit is ∆Pi3
=
(rpt–1)Pload0 in this stage. The initial states of this stage
(¯
ωj(tc) and ¯
ω′
j(tc)) can be calculated based on (A.27). Then
the time-domain solution of the ENF is derived based on the
Laplace transform method.
¯
ωj (t) =

ω0 + C1 (t −tc) + C2 + e−λ(t−tc)·
(Acos cos (ωd (t −tc)) + Asin sin (ωd (t −tc)))

(A.30)
where C1, C2, Acos, and Asin are all constants.
C1 = rpPload0
¯
Dj+ ¯
Kj
C2 = Pload0 ·
rp¯
τ ¯
Kj−( ¯
Dj+ ¯
Kj)−2rp ¯
Hj
( ¯
Dj+ ¯
Kj)
2
Acos = ¯
ωj (tc) −
Pload0(rp¯
τj ¯
Kj−¯
Dj−¯
Kj−2rp ¯
Hj)
( ¯
Dj+ ¯
Kj)
2
Asin =
2¯
τj ¯
Hj ¯
ω′
j(tc)+ (¯
ωj (tc)−C2)(¯
τj ¯
Dj +2 ¯
Hj)
2
−
2rp ¯
τj ¯
Hj Pload0
¯
Dj + ¯
Kj
2¯
τj ¯
Hjωd
(A.31)


--- Page 10 ---
10
Similarly, the derivative of the frequency in this stage is
calculated as,
¯
ω′
j(t) =


C1 + e−λ(t−tc)·
 (ωdAsin −λAcos) cos (ωd(t −tc))−
(ωdAcos + λAsin) sin (ωd(t −tc))



(A.32)
Setting equation (A.32) to zero gives
e−λτ cos(ωdτ + α) = γ
(A.33)
where
τ = t −tc
α = arctan(ωdAcos + λAsin
ωdAsin −λAcos
)
γ = −
C1
p
(ωdAsin −λAcos)2 + (ωdAcos + λAsin)2
(A.34)
For simplification, a second-order Taylor expansion around
τ = 0 is performed to equation (A.33). That is,
e−λτ ≈1 −λτ + 1
2λ2τ 2
cos(ωdτ + α) ≈cos α −ωd sin α · τ −1
2ω2
d cos α · τ 2
(A.35)
When ignoring the high-order terms, (A.33) is simplified.
cos α −γ
|
{z
}
E0
−(λ cos α + ωd sin α)
|
{z
}
E1
τ
+ 1
2
  λ2 −ω2
d

cos α −2λωd sin α

|
{z
}
E2
τ 2 = 0
(A.36)
Then the solution is calculated as,
τ ∗= E1 −
p
E2
1 −4E2E0
2E2
,
t∗
3 = tc + τ ∗.
(A.37)
If t∗
3 ∈[tc, tr], tm3 = t∗
3. Otherwise, if t∗
3 /
∈[tc, tr], tm3 =
arg min {¯
ωj(tc), ¯
ωj(tr)}.
(4) Post-fault phase (t > tr). After the time of tc, all the
loads and generators recover to the pre-fault states, then the
frequency dynamics have the same form with (A.27). The
initial states of this stage are ¯
ωj(tr) and ¯
ω′
j(tr). The frequency
dynamics are derived using the Laplace transform method.
¯
ωj(t) = ω0 + e−λ(t−tr) ·
"
¯
ωj (tr) cos(ωd(t −tr))+
¯
ω′
j(tr)+λ¯
ωj(tr)
ωd
sin(ωd(t −tr))
#
(A.38)
The time deviation of the frequency is,
¯
ω′
j(t) = e−λ(t−tr) ·
"
¯
ω′
j(tr) cos(ωd(t −tr))−
λ¯
ω′
j(tr)+(ω2
d+λ2)¯
ωj(tr)
ωd
sin(ωd(t −tr))
#
(A.39)
Solution of this phase has the same form as
t∗
4 = tr + 1
ωd
"
arctan
 
ωd¯
ω′
j(tr)
λ¯
ω′
j(tr) + (ω2
d + λ2)¯
ωj(tr)
!
+ kπ
#
(A.40)
Let k∗
4 be the minimum integer satisfying t∗
4 > tr. Then tm4
is equal to t∗
4 at k = k∗
4 based on (A.40).
REFERENCES
[1] G. Hu, Y. Yang, H. Xin, L. Huang, X. Liu, H. Ruan, and H. Gao,
“A unified method for assessing frequency support capability of diverse
renewable power generation units,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable
Energy, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 377–392, 2026.
[2] L. Li, D. Zhu, X. Zou, J. Hu, Y. Kang, and J. M. Guerrero, “Review of
frequency regulation requirements for wind power plants in international
grid codes,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 187,
p. 113731, 2023.
[3] J. Bialek, “What does the gb power outage on 9 august 2019 tell us
about the current state of decarbonised power systems?,” Energy Policy,
vol. 146, p. 111821, 2020.
[4] P. Ju, Y. Zheng, Y. Jin, C. Qin, Y. Jiang, and L. Cao, “Analytic
assessment of the power system frequency security,” IET Generation,
Transmission & Distribution, vol. 15, no. 15, pp. 2215–2225, 2021.
[5] Y. Lan, Y. Zhang, W. Yao, S. Wei, T. Chen, H. Shuai, and J. Wen,
“Trustworthy data-driven prefault frequency security assessment for
power systems using disturbance-informed learning,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1950–1961, 2026.
[6] A. Tayyebi, D. Groß, A. Anta, F. Kupzog, and F. D¨
orfler, “Frequency
stability of synchronous machines and grid-forming power converters,”
IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1004–1018, 2020.
[7] Y. Zhang, Q. Guo, Y. Zhou, and H. Sun, “Online frequency security
assessment based on analytical model considering limiting modules,”
CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 1363–
1372, 2022.
[8] Z. Peng, Q. Peng, Y. Zhang, H. Han, Y. Yin, and T. Liu, “Online
inertia allocation for grid-connected renewable energy systems based on
generic asf model under frequency nadir constraint,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1615–1627, 2024.
[9] Y. Xie, C. Li, H. Zhang, H. Sun, and V. Terzija, “Long-term frequency
stability assessment based on extended frequency response model,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 122444–122455, 2020.
[10] G. Zhang, J. Ren, Y. Zeng, F. Liu, S. Wang, and H. Jia, “Security as-
sessment method for inertia and frequency stability of high proportional
renewable energy system,” International Journal of Electrical Power &
Energy Systems, vol. 153, p. 109309, 2023.
[11] M. Sun, G. Xie, L. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Li, and Y. Min, “Study on the
necessity and role of inertia in power system frequency response,”
in 2020 IEEE 4th Conference on Energy Internet and Energy System
Integration (EI2), pp. 155–159, 2020.
[12] W. Zhang, Y. Wen, and C. Y. Chung, “Inertia security evaluation and
application in low-inertia power systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 1725–1737, 2025.
[13] N. Ma and D. Wang, “Extracting spatial-temporal characteristics of
frequency dynamic in large-scale power grids,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 2654–2662, 2019.
[14] C. He, H. Geng, K. Rajashekara, and A. Chandra, “Analysis and
control of frequency stability in low-inertia power systems: A review,”
IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 2363–2383,
2024.
[15] J. Fu, Q. Zhang, W.-L. Tao, X.-T. Wang, and H.-W. Wang, “Frequency
security assessment of power systems based on dynamic inertia con-
stants,” in 2025 10th International Symposium on Advances in Electrical,
Electronics and Computer Engineering (ISAEECE), pp. 119–123, 2025.
[16] S. Ke, L. Ding, X. Shi, P. Fan, H. Wang, L. Chen, J. Yang, and
C. Y. Chung, “Response characteristics and regulation feasibility of dc
charging station controlled by gfm/gfl virtual inertia for grid frequency
stability,” IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification, vol. 11,
no. 3, pp. 7743–7758, 2025.
[17] A. E. Leon, ´
A. R. del Nozal, and J. M. Mauricio, “Frequency support
strategy for fast response energy storage systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 5439–5442, 2024.
[18] M. M. Mobashsher, A. A. Abdoos, S. M. Hosseini, S. M. Hashemi,
and M. Sanaye-Pasand, “A new fault type classification method in the
presence of inverter-based resources,” International Journal of Electrical
Power & Energy Systems, vol. 147, p. 108793, 2023.
